
CHAPTER NINETEEN

# ENZYMOLOGY OF AMINOGLYCOSIDE BIOSYNTHESIS—DEDUCTION FROM GENE CLUSTERS

Udo F. Wehmeier* and Wolfgang Piepersberg†

## Contents

1. Introduction  
   460  

   1.1. Basic concepts of CAG biosynthesis  
   464  

   1.2. Key to the biosynthetic classes of CAGs  
   467  

2. Some Key Enzymes in the Biosyntheses of Aminoglycoside Antibiotics  
   469  

   2.1. Investigation of a dTDP-6-deoxyhexose pathway in STR-producing Streptomyces griseus subsp. griseus DSM 40236  
   469  

   2.2. dTDP-D-glucose synthase (StrD, RfbA)  
   470  

   2.3. dTDP-D-glucose 4, 6-dehydratase (StrE, RfbB)  
   471  

   2.4. dTDP-4-6-glucose 3, 5-epimerase (StrM, RfbC)  
   471  

   2.5. dTDP-L-rhamnose synthase (StrL, RfbD)  
   471  

   2.6. L-glutamine:scyllo-inosose aminotransferase StsC (EC 2.6.1.50) from Streptomyces griseus subsp. griseus DSM 40236  
   472  

   2.7. L-arginine:scyllo-inosamine-phosphate amidinotransferase StrB 1 from Streptomyces griseus subsp. griseus DSM 40236 (ATCC 10137)  
   473  

   2.8. Streptomycin-phosphate phosphatase StrK (EC 3.1.3.39) from Streptomyces griseus subsp. griseus DSM 40236 (ATCC 10137)  
   473  

   2.9. Myo-inositol-2-dehydrogenase (IDH; scyllo-inosose synthase) ForG (EC 1.1.1.18) from Micromonospora olivasterospora DSM 43868  
   475  

   2.10. Glycosyltransferases involved in CAG pathways  
   476  

   2.11. KanM 1, KanM 2, and KanN of S. kanamyceticus DSM 40500  
   477  

* Department of Sports Medicine, Bergische University Wuppertal, Wuppertal, Germany  
† Department of Chemical Microbiology, Bergische University Wuppertal, Wuppertal, Germany  

Methods in Enzymology, Volume 459  
© 2009 Elsevier Inc.  
ISSN 0076-6879, DOI: 10.1016/S0076-6879(09)04619-9  
All rights reserved.

3. Acarbose and Related Metabolites 478
   3.1. The synthesis and modification of C7-cyclitols 479
   3.2. The biochemistry of carbophors: A unique system for the acquisition of glucose from starch in actinomycetes 481
References 487

# Abstract

The classical aminoglycosides are, with very few exceptions, typically actino-bacterial secondary metabolites with antimicrobial activities all mediated by inhibiting translation on the 30S subunit of the bacterial ribosome. Some chemically related natural products inhibit glucosidases by mimicking oligo-$\alpha$-1,4-glucosides. The biochemistry of the aminoglycoside biosynthetic pathways is still a developing field since none of the pathways has been analyzed to completeness as yet. In this chapter we treat the enzymology of aminoglycoside biosyntheses as far as it becomes apparent from recent investigations based on the availability of DNA sequence data of biosynthetic gene clusters for all major structural classes of these bacterial metabolites. We give a more general overview of the field, including descriptions of some key enzymes in various aminoglycoside pathways, whereas in Chapter 20 provides a detailed account of the better-studied enzymology thus far known for the neomycin and butirosin pathways.

## 1. INTRODUCTION

Cyclitol-containing aminoglycosides (CAGs, see examples in Fig. 19.1) and some structurally related compounds (e.g., mycothiol) (Newton *et al.*, 2006), with very few exceptions, are natural products of actinomycetes. After the discovery of the antibiotic streptomycin in 1943 (Schatz *et al.*, 1944), this group of substances became one of the major groups of natural therapeutics in medicine and are still in focus of much molecular biological, biochemical, and pharmaceutical research (Fig. 19.1 and Table 19.1) (Arya, 2007; Piepersberg, *et al.*, 2007; Piepersberg and Wehmeier, 2009).

Producers of CAGs with antibiotic activity are members of the high-G+C Gram-positive (Actinobacteria) genera Actinoplanes, Streptomyces, Streptosporangium, Saccharopolyspora, Streptoalloteichus, Micromonospora, Dactylosporangium, and Frankia; an exception is BTR, which is produced by Bacillus circulans, a bacterium belonging to the low-G+C Firmicutes.

Two distinct targets are seen with CAGs, the bacterial ribosome (antibiotics) and alpha-glucosidases (enzyme inhibitors). All antibiotically active compounds of this class of secondary metabolites act on the 30S subunit of the bacterial ribosome by binding to one of at least four sites on the 16S rRNA; there they interfere with translation in distinctly different ways:

(1) STR binds tightly to the sugar-phosphate backbone in four different

Figure 19.1 Examples of the chemical structures of aminocyclitol-aminoglycosides (CAGs) and of some related actinomycete metabolites. Some of the major families of CAGs are produced as mixtures of several closely related end products, where the various components are distinguished by adding a capital letter to the trivial name. Acarbose, belonging to a family of products also called amylostatins, and validamycins are secreted actinomycete enzyme inhibitors and have no antibiotic activity. Mycothiol is a nonsecreted primary metabolite occurring in most or all actinobacteria and acting as the detoxifying thiol with a role similar to that of glutathione in other groups of organisms.

Table 19.1 Examples of CAGs for which sequence data for complete biosynthetic gene clusters are available.

| Aminoglycoside (Family, Complex$^{b}$) | Producing organism, Strain no. | Biosynthetic class$^{c}$ | Accession code | Genes in cluster |
|----------------------------------------|-------------------------------|---------------------------|-----------------|------------------|
| **STR-related family**                 |                               |                           |                 |                  |
| Streptomycin (STR)                     | S. griseus ssp. griseus DSM 40236 | Ca-6DOH                   | AJ862840        | 23               |
| Hydroxystreptomycin                    | S. glaucescens GLA.0 (DSM 40716) | Ca-6DOH                   | AJ006985        | (26–31)$^{d}$    |
| Spectinomycin (SPC)                    | S. netropsis DSM 40093         | Ca-6DOH                   | U70376          | 18               |
| **NEO-related family**                 |                               |                           |                 |                  |
| Neomycin (NEO)                         | S. fradiae DSM 40063           | 2DOS-GA(Cb1)              | AJ629247        | 22               |
| Butirosin (BTR)                        | B. circulans ATCC 21557        | 2DOS-GA(Cb1)              | AB097196        | 25               |
| Ribostamycin (RIB)                     | S. ribosidificus NRRL B-11466   | 2DOS-GA(Cb1)              | AJ744850        | 20               |
| Paromomycin (PAR)                      | S. rimosus ssp. paromomycinus NRRL 2455 | 2DOS-GA(Cb1)              | AJ628955        | 22               |
| Lividomycin (LIV)                      | S. sp. (lividus) CBS 844.73     | 2DOS-GA(Cb1)              | AJ748832        | 23               |
| **KAN-related family**$^{c}$           |                               |                           |                 |                  |
| Kanamycin (KAN)                        | S. kanamyceticus DSM 40500     | 2DOS-GA(Cb1)              | AJ628422        | 21               |
| Tobramycin (TOB)                       | S. sp. (tenebrarius) DSM 40477 | 2DOS-GA(Cb1)              | AJ810851        | 21               |
| Apramycin (APR)                        | S. sp. (tenebrarius) DSM 40477 | 2DOS-GA(Cb1)              | AJ629123        | 30               |
| Gentamicin (GEN)                       | M. echinospora DSM 43036       | 2DOS-GA(Cb1)              | AJ628149        | 32               |

FOR-r related family

| Fortimicin (FOR) | M. olivasterospora DSM 43868 | FOR-type (Ca) | AJ628421 | (34) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Fortimicin (FOR) | Frankia sp. CcI 3 | FOR-type (Ca) | NC_007777.1 | (34) |
| Istamycin (IST) | S. tenjimariensis ATCC 31603 | FOR-type (Cb1) | AJ845083 | 26 |

HYG-B-related family

| Hygromycin B (HYG-B) | S. hygroscopicus ssp. hygroscopicus DSM 40578 | HYG-B-type (Cb1) | AJ628642 | 22 |

ACB-related family

| Acarbose (ACB) | Actinoplanes sp. SE 50/110 | Cb2-Hex | Y18523 | 25 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Acarbose (ACB) | S. glaucescens GLA.0 (DSM 40716) | Cb2-Hex | AM409314 | 24 |
| Validamycin (VAL) | S. hygros c. ssp. limoneus IFO 12704 | Cb2-Hex | DQ223652 | 22 |

a Only the most complete stage of sequencing is given where multiple coverage of the same genomic area is reported.

b The majority of aminoglycosides designated by a common name are composed of a complex mixture; chemically distinct components in a complex are distinguished by adding capital letters, and in some cases additionally by figures to the name (e.g., gentamicin C1); aminoglycoside names are abbreviated as given below.

c For definition see text.

d The number of genes clearly belonging to these clusters is still unclear; the for gene cluster in Frankia sp. CcI 3 was found by chance in the genome sequence of this organism.

S., Streptomyces; Streptoallo, Streptoalloteichus; M., Micromonospora; B., Bacillus; S., Streptomyces; c, completely sequenced; p, partially sequenced; r, resistance gene(s) outside biosynthetic clusters; sp., species; ssp., subspecies.

regions of the 16 rRNA, at nucleotides 13, 526, 915, and 1490, thereby affecting the initial selection and proofreading steps by fixing the 30S subunit in its *ram* state, which lowers the fidelity of tRNA recognition in the A-site (Carter *et al.*, 2000); (2) SPC binds to helix 34 and inhibits translocation of peptidyl-tRNA from the A- to the P-site (Carter *et al.*, 2000); (3) KAS binds in the path of the mRNA between the P- and the E-sites, blocking initiator tRNA binding and thereby initiation of translation (Schlünzen *et al.*, 2006); (4) the 2DOS-GA group of CAGs (e.g., NEOs, GENs) interact with the A-site portion of 16S rRNA helix 44, disturbing correct codon-anticodon pairing at the essential nucleotides A-1492/A-1493 and also inhibiting 30S subunit assembly (Carter *et al.*, 2000; Mehta and Champney, 2002); (5) HYG-B binds to another region in helix 44 controlling codon-anticodon interaction in the A-, P-, and E-sites, by interacting with nucleotides U-1406, C-1496, and U-1498, and inhibiting ribosomal fidelity, translocation, a ribosomal ATPase, and ribosome biogenesis, also on eukaryotic ribosomes (Brodersen *et al.*, 2000; Borovinskaya *et al.*, 2008; McGaha and Champney, 2007). The glucosidase inhibitors target the alpha-1,4-glucoside hydrolase center of alpha-amylases, amylo maltases and similar enzymes with their nonhydrolyzable N-glycosidically linked pseudodisaccharide unit (Brayer *et al.*, 2000; Leemhuis *et al.*, 2004).

The recent analysis of the gene clusters for almost all of the well studied CAGs and related cyclitol-containing metabolites (Table 19.1) revealed that their biosynthetic pathways are all based largely on monofunctional enzymes catalyzing single steps in the pathway, in contrast to the multistep enzymology involved in the production of polyketides or non-ribosomal peptides (see respective chapters in this volume). This knowledge has provided access to a more intense study of the biochemistry involved in the biosynthesis of aminoglycosidic compounds, which has been started in a few cases. However, none of the pathways for CAGs has yet been elucidated completely on the basis of enzymology. Pathways for other CAG-like metabolites, such as mycothiol, do not use any biosynthetic concepts or enzymes with close similarity to those involved in CAG biosyntheses (Newton *et al.*, 2006; Piepersberg *et al.*, 2007).

### 1.1. Basic concepts of CAG biosynthesis

Core components in practically all natural products of this group are cyclitol units which become decorated by side groups introduced (1) via modifying steps directly on the cyclitol and (2) by glycosylation with various sugar moieties, which (3) can become further modified by pathway-specific enzymes either before or after glycosyl transfer. This general principal of design can be used to classify the aminoglycosides into biosynthetic classes mostly comprising structurally related families of end products (Table 19.1).
A proposal for the definition of “pathway formulas” classifying the CAG pathways into a general system has been published previously (Piepersberg, 1997). Therein the cyclitol pathways were given a “C” code according to their biochemistry.

Two distinct (amino-)cyclitol pathways are used in the initiation of CAG pathways (Fig. 19.2), one based on $myo$-inositol (Ca pathway), the other on 1-keto-2-deoxy-cylitols (Cb pathways). The primary precursors in both cases are aldosphosphates, D-glucose-6-phosphate in Ca and Cb1, and sedo-heptulose-7-phosphate in Cb2. Pathway Ca is used in the biosynthetic pathways for STR-related CAGs, FORs, and some others of minor importance (Table 19.1, Figs. 19.1 and 19.2).

The Ca pathway starts with the two-step formation of $myo$-inositol in a pathway and is not encoded in the cognate biosynthetic gene clusters. The reason for this is that the two-step biosynthesis of $myo$-inositol via $myo$-inositolphosphate (alternatively designated as D-$myo$-inositol-3-phosphate or L-$myo$-inositol-1-phosphate) occurs by a eukaryotic type L-$myo$-inositol-1-phosphate synthase (INO1, EC 5.5.1.4) and

![Diagram]

Figure 19.2 Basic CAG pathways. The biosynthetic routes for (amino-)cyclitol and pseudodisaccharide (in case of the paromamine-based and FOR-related ACAGAs) formation are schematically represented in order to classify the aminoglycosides into biosynthetic families. For details, see text. (2DO)sIS, (2-deoxy-)scyllo-inosamine; NAGA, N-acetyl-glucosamine; 6DOH, 6-deoxyhexose component; MOD/GT = modification and glycosylation phase in all pathways. For aminoglycoside product families see Table19.1.myo-inositolphosphate phosphatase (IMP, SuhB; EC 3.1.3.25). In contrast to most other bacteria, these are essential metabolic activities in actinomy- cetes, because all actinobacteria produce mycothiol (the major cellular thiol and redox cocatalyst) as an essential metabolite. Actinobacterial genomes mostly harbor more than one gene, sometimes several genes with either L- myo-inositol-1-phosphate synthase or inositol monophosphatase signatures. In some CAG gene clusters, however, a putative IMP enzyme for the dephosphorylation of myo-inositolphosphate seems to be encoded. For example, the strO gene in the str/sts-cluster of STR producers encodes a protein with monophosphatase signature; however, since the streptidine pathway involves two dephosphorylation steps, it is not clear at present whether StrO is catalyzing phosphorolysis from L-myo-inositol-1-phosphate ([Walker, 1975; Piepersberg et al., 2007]). Also, the spcA and forA genes in the respective clusters for SPC and FOR biosynthesis, which also involve a Ca cyclitol pathway, seem to encode IMP enzymes. The reason for this could be that the housekeeping enzyme activity of this enzyme is reduced in the mostly nonvegetative production phases for secondary metabolites to too low levels in these species. To render myo-inositol an aminotransferase substrate for the formation of scyllo-inosamine it has to be oxidized by a myo-inositol 2-dehydrogenase (IDH, EC 1.1.1.18). This enzyme activity, too, is normally not specific for CAG biosynthesis and seems to be encoded by all actinomy- cete genomes sequenced so far; it normally plays a role in the catabolism of myo-inositol in many organisms. However, in the STR- and SPC-pathways an IDH seems to be encoded by the respective gene clusters (StrI/StsB, SpcB/ SpcH) and a second cyclitol oxidase, a 1-aminocyclitol 3-dehydrogenase, prepares the cyclitol precursor later for a second transamination step. It was proven by us recently that in the FOR-producer the gene forG encodes an IDH and that the gene is essential for FOR production (see Section 2.9).

In the Cb pathways the C6- and C7-cyclitols (Cb1 started by 2-deoxy- scyllo-inosose synthase [see Chapter 20]; Cb2 started by 2-epi-5-epi-valiolone synthase [Stratmann et al., 1999]), being the precursors of e.g., 2-deoxystreptamine in the 2DOS-CAGs or of valienamine in the acarbose- related metabolites, are synthesized by enzymes (“C-enymes,” such as NeoC, KanC, AcbC) structurally closely related to and following the same mechanism as is used by dehydroquinate synthase (DHQS, EC 4.6.1.3). These enzymes are NAD⁺-dependent, cyclizing phosphate lyases and catalyze intramolecular aldol condensations on aldosephosphates, yielding nonphosphorylated 1-keto-2-deoxycyclitols. The Cb pathways immediately yield ketocyclitols which can be used directly as aminotransferase substrates.

Thus the basic concept of CAG formation can be summarized as follows: (1) single-step enzymes—that is, enzymes with only one reaction centre, and mostly derived from sugar and cyclitol metabolism—successively activate, modify, and glycosidically link sugar precursors; (2) a second phase of decorating modification frequently follows after oligomerization; (3) thedistribution of modification phases over the pathway varies between biosynthetic classes; and (4) cyclitol amination is a common principle in a majority of CAGs, normally catalyzed by unusual L-glutamine–dependent cyclitol aminotransferases (see description of StsC in Section 2.6). These biosynthetic concepts are similarly found in the quite variable oligosaccharidic building blocks of bacterial heteropolysaccharides, normally used as cell wall components or extracellular surface material. Therefore, anabolic cell wall metabolism might be the evolutionary and ecological (cell protection) source of CAGs (Piepersberg, 2001).

# 1.2. Key to the biosynthetic classes of CAGs

1. **Ca-6DOH**: The biosynthesis of these pseudodi- or pseudotri-saccharides is based on the formation of a cyclitol unit via the Ca pathway (streptidine in STR; bluensidine in bluensomycin; actinamine in SPC; unmodified *myo*-inositol in KAS) followed by a glycosidic attachment of a preformed 6-deoxyhexose (6DOH) moiety. Most modification steps occur on the monomer level. In KAS the cyclitol becomes converted to D-*chiro*-inositol after having been glycosylated. For the STRs, biosynthetic enzymology has been studied to a considerable extent (see Section 2.1–2.8), whereas for the SPCs and KAS only a few data are available.

2. **2DOS-GA (Cb1)**: The core biosynthetic design of this largest and pharmaceutically most interesting group of CAGs is based on the formation, via the Cb1-pathway, of the 2-deoxydiaminocyclitol 2DOS from scyllo-inosose and its 4-glycosylation with D-glucosamine (GA), forming the characteristic intermediate paromamine (Fig. 19.2). The modifications on subunits are performed on both the monomer and oligomer levels; for example, various modifications important for the properties of the final products, such as transaminations, methylations, and epimerization, occur during the late pathways on the oligosaccharidic intermediates. The end products are pseudotri- or pseudotetra-saccharides; APR deviates structurally from this pattern, but nevertheless clearly is a member of this group. The biosynthetic route for GENs has been studied in detail by collecting a set of blocked mutants and studying the accumulation of intermediates in them (Kase *et al.*, 1982). Biosynthetic enzymology has been studied to some extent for some of the NEO-related compounds, to a lesser extent, for the KANs/GENs, and not at all for APR. In the NEO-family paromamine becomes 6′-transaminated and 5-ribosylated forming the pseudotrisaccharidic RIB, an antibiologically active end product itself (Table 19.1). In the BTR-pathway, RIB becomes 1-aminoacylated with 2-hydroxy-4-aminobutyric acid. In NEO-, PAR-, and LIV-producers RIB becomes further glucosaminylated in the 3″-position and modified in this fourth glycosidic moiety. In the KAN/GEN-family paromamine is6-glycosylated by neutral sugars, either a C6-pyranose (KAN) or a C5-pyranose (GEN). These pseudotrisaccharidic precursors are 6′- and 3″-transaminated and can be modified further by 3‴-N- and 4″-C-methylation steps. In the producers of GEN-related CAGs a quite complicated, branching late pathway, characterized by 6′-C-methylation for only part of the pool of intermediates, 3′,4′-didehydroxylation, 6′-epimerization, and 6′-N-methylation, creates a complex of related GEN products varying in proportion between individual producer strains ([Piepersberg et al., 2007](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-73253-6_19)). Another unusual situation exists in the producers of the so-called nebramycin complex, to which TOB, a 3′-dehydroxy-KAN-B, and APR belong, though the latter is a single-substituted 2DOS derivative (Fig. 19.1). We and others have studied the genetics of TOB/APR-biosynthesis in two different organisms, *S.* sp. “tenebrarius” DSM 40477 (Table 19.1) and *Streptoalloteichus hindustanus* DSM 44523 (accession codes AJ875019 and AB103327). In both species, there are two independent *tob-* and *apr*-clusters, both encoding an almost complete pathway of their own; the TOB-pathway is equivalent to that of KAN-B. However, the two genes necessary for the 3′-dehydroxylation of KAN-B are located in the *apr*-cluster (*aprD3*, *aprD4* genes), and this modification is shared between the two pathways ([Piepersberg et al., 2007](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-73253-6_19)).

3. **HYG-B-type (Cb1):** Biosynthesis of the cyclitol in the third unique pathway is again based on the Cb1 product 2DOS. However, formation of the pseudotrisaccharidic end product principally deviates from the 2DOS-GA type by the glycosidic attachment of a neutral hexose to the 5-position of 2DOS and of an aminoheptose moiety via an unusual orthoester bond to the 2′- and 3′-positions of the hexose (cf. Fig. 19.1). The modification steps have to be assumed to occur on both the monomer and the oligomer levels; however, biosynthetic enzymes have not been studied *in vitro*.

4. **FOR-type (Ca or Cb1):** The biosynthesis is based on the formation of a monoamino cyclitol unit, scyllo-inosamine in FORs, and 2-deoxy-scyllo-inosamine in ISTs, from either *myo*-inositolphosphate (Ca route) or scyllo-inosose (Cb1 route) and glycosidic attachment of a D-glucosamine moiety. The modification of subunits is achieved mostly on the condensed level of these pseudodisaccharides, whereby the cyclitol also becomes highly decorated with additional side groups (see the structure of FOR-A in Fig. 19.1). A reasonable picture of the complicated FOR- and IST-pathways comes from structural analyzes of intermediates accumulated in a series of mutants ([Odakura et al., 1984](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-73253-6_19)). A significant paralleling between the FOR- and GEN-pathways, evident from the use of several common biosynthetic steps for 3′,4′-dehydroxylation and 6′-C-methylation, is reflected by a number of unique genes with very high DNA homology between the *for-* and *gen*-clusters (for details, see [Piepersberg et al., 2007](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-73253-6_19)).
5. Cb2-Hex: The biosynthesis of these malto-oligosaccharide analogues is based on the formation of a C-7 cyclitol unit (valienol, valiolol, valienamine) via the **Cb2** pathway and glycosidic attachment of (6-deoxy)hexose units; they are malto-oligosaccharide analogues, that is, linear chains of up to six (pseudo-)saccharidic units linked by glycosidic bonds structurally mimicking α-1,4-glucosides. Some enzymes involved in their biosynthesis and probable cyclic conversion have been studied (see Section 3).

---

### 2. SOME KEY ENZYMES IN THE BIOSYNTHESSES OF AMINOGLYCOSIDE ANTIBIOTICS

Some enzymology involved in key steps of the STR, NEO, KAN, and ACB-pathways investigated by us are described in subsequent sections; the other enzymes important for the biosyntheses of the 2DOS-CGA compounds BTR and NEO are described in Chapter 20.

#### 2.1. Investigation of a dTDP-6-deoxyhexose pathway in STR-producing *Streptomyces griseus* subsp. *griseus* DSM 40236

In our analyses of the STR biosynthetic gene cluster and its encoded enzymatic tool box we found that four genes, *strDEL* and *strM*, organized in the two transcription units *strDEL* and *strNB2M*, had about equally high similarity to the dTDP-L-rhamnose biosynthetic genes in the *rfb*-locus of enterobacteria, that is, *rfbA* (*rmlA*), *rfbB* (*rmlB*), *rfbC* (*rmlC*), and *rfbD* (*rmlD*) from Gram-negative bacteria producing a lipopolysaccharide containing L-rhamnose ([Reeves, 1993](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-78423-1_1)). These are equivalent to many genes occurring in all groups of bacteria and are mostly involved in the biosynthesis of extracellular polysaccharides; for example, *Escherichia coli* harbors a second set of *rfbA,B*-related genes, *rfhH* and *rfhG*, involved in the synthesis of enterobacterial common antigen. The encoded proteins have the following enzyme activities: RfbA (RmlA) is the dTDP-glucose synthase (glucose-1-phosphate thymidylyltransferase; EC 2.7.7.24); RfbB (RmlB), the dTDP-glucose 4,6-dehydratase (EC 4.2.1.46); RfbC (RmlC), the dTDP-4-keto-6-deoxyglucose (dTDP-6-deoxy-D-xylo-4-hexulose) 3,5-epimerase (EC 5.1.3.13); and RfbD (RmlD), the dTDP-L-rhamnose synthase (dTDP-6-deoxy-L-lyxo-4-hexulose reductase; EC 1.1.1.133). Grisebach and collaborators had first described a dTDP-hexose pathway involved in STR biosynthesis in *S. griseus* subsp. *griseus* N2-3-11 (equivalent to wildtype strain ATCC 10137, DSM 40236) ([Ortmann et al., 1979](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00428586); [Grisebach, 1978](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00428586)). This was postulated to comprise the first three of the four steps of the dTDP-L-rhamnose pathway, forming dTDP-4-keto-L-rhamnose, and
finally its reductive conversion to dTDP-dihydrostreptose. The final step should be similar to dTDP-L-rhamnose synthesis and was postulated to involve, besides reduction at C-5/C-6, a C-chain reorganization, such that C-3 of the hexose is branched out from the linear chain and, forming a furanosidic ring sugar with two C₁-branches at the C-3 and C-4 atoms (cf. Fig. 19.1; positions 3′ and 4′ in the formula of STR).

In order to correlate these earlier findings with the genetic record as it became evident from the str/sts-cluster, we investigated the enzyme activities of the heterologously produced proteins StrD,E,M,L in comparison to the well studied enzymes RfbA,B,C,D from Gram-negative bacteria; the dTDP-activated sugars were identified and their accumulation quantitatively measured by HPLC.

### 2.2. dTDP-D-glucose synthase (StrD, RfbA)

This enzyme was tested either (1) in 500-μl assay volume at pH 8.0 and 37° containing 50 mM Tris/HCl buffer, 10 mM MgCl₂, dTTP 2 mM, α-D-glucose-1-phosphate 10 mM, 170 μl PPi-reagent (Sigma Deisenhofen, Germany), enzyme preparations at an activity in the range of 1 to 100 nkat; or (2) in 300-μl final volumes with the same composition but with the addition of 35 nkat inorganic pyrophosphatase instead of PPi-reagent. The reaction was monitored in (1) by photometrically measuring the consumption of NADH at 340 nm; and in (2) 20-μl samples were withdrawn from 150-μl reaction mixtures, which were generally taken after 30, 45, or 60 min, and in which reactions were stopped by boiling for 1 min, and insoluble material was separated by centrifugation, and then subjected to HPLC analysis (Beckmann Instruments, Munich, Germany; pump module 125, autosampler 502, UV detector 166, radioisotope detector 171); nucleotide-activated sugars were measured at 260 nm for unlabeled compounds or on a radioisotope detector for ¹⁴C-labeled sugars. Chromatography was run on a reversed-phase column (Eurospher 100 C18, Knauer, Berlin, Germany; elution by 0 to 40% acetonitrile gradient). The background activity for dTDP-glucose synthase was surprisingly low in STR-producing *S. griseus*. StrD could be overexpressed to a considerable extent in *Streptomyces lividans* and *E. coli*; the product, dTDP-D-glucose, eluted at 35.9 min from the HPLC. Like the standard enzyme RfbA, StrD had maximal substrate specificities for dTTP and D-glucose-1-phosphate; only with the substrate combinations UTP/D-glucose-1-phosphate, dTTP/D-glucosamine-1-phosphate, and UTP/N-acetyl-D-glucosamine-1-phosphate could minor activities also be detected. RfbA and StrD are both feedback inhibited by dTDP-L-rhamnose; e.g., in reaction assays containing 10 mM and 2.5 mM of the substrates glucose-1-phosphate and dTTP, respectively, 445 μM of dTDP-L-rhamnose inhibited both enzymes to 71 to 72% residual activity.
2.3. dTDP-D-glucose 4,6-dehydratase (StrE, RfbB)

These enzymes were measured in similar assays as in $(1.b)$: $300-\mu l$ test volumes contained $50 \, mM$ Tris/HCl buffer (pH 7.5), $2 \, mM$ dTDP-glucose, and in the range of 1 to 100 nkat of enzyme activity; for the streptomyces enzyme sources the buffer concentration was enhanced to $150 \, mM$ and $1.5 \, mM$ NAD⁺ was added. For detection of substrates/products HPLC was used (see Section 2.2); dTDP-4-keto-6-deoxyglucose eluted at 37.8 min. The StrE protein turned out to be a dTDP-glucose 4,6-dehydratase with very similar properties to RfbD, with the exception that StrE did not contain firmly bound NAD⁺ as a prosthetic group, as is the case for RfbB. The 4,6-dehydratase background activities were quite low in *S. griseus* N2-3-11 (vegetative phase) and *S. lividans* TK23. StrE could be overexpressed in *S. lividans*, but not in *E. coli*. StrD did not convert other activated sugars, such as dUDP-D-glucose, UDP-D-glucose, or CDP-D-glucose.

2.4. dTDP-4-6-glucose 3,5-epimerase (StrM, RfbC)

The 3,5-epimerase activity was assayed as a coupled reaction together with the subsequent dTDP-L-rhamnose synthase because it turned out that the equilibrium of the epimerization lies fully on the substrate side and no reaction could be detected in the absence of a product-consuming reaction. Test volumes of $300 \, \mu l$ contained $50 \, mM$ Tris/HCl buffer pH 7.5, $2 \, mM$ dTDP-4-keto-6-deoxyglucose, $2.5 \, mM$ NADPH, $35$ nkat RfbD (nonlimiting enzyme activity), and variable concentrations of StrM or RfbC preparations. The 3,5-epimerase activity could be measured both photometrically by NADPH consumption and in HPLC separations, where the dTDP-L-rhamnose could be detected and eluted at 35.8 min. In both assay systems, identical values for the specific activity of StrM/RfbC were measured.

2.5. dTDP-L-rhamnose synthase (StrL, RfbD)

This enzyme was assayed in the same test system as for the dTDP-4-6-glucose 3,5-epimerase (see Section 2.4) with the difference that the content of StrM (RfbC) was fixed to $35$ nkat and the activity of the dTDP-L-rhamnose synthase StrL (RfbD) was varied. Both StrL and RfbD could be highly overexpressed over the background activities of their donor strains and in *E. coli* BL21 and *S. lividans* TK23, respectively, and they have identical substrate and product specificities. Both enzymes are inhibited by their product dTDP-L-rhamnose; e.g., residual activity is 50 to 55% at a product concentration of $380 \, \mu M$. Therefore, StrL clearly is a dTDP-L-rhamnose synthase and has no dTDP-dihydrostreptose synthase activity. To further

exclude production of a different product (dTDP-L-dihydrostreptose) by StrL this enzyme was enriched from a protein preparation of the overproducing strain of S. *lividans* TK23 and tested in the presence of a RfbD-free RfbC preparation obtained by DEAE cellulose chromatography from the RfbC-overproducing strain of *E. coli* BL21. The nucleotide-activated sugar product was purified and analyzed by NMR as described elsewhere (*Elling et al.*, 2005) and clearly was dTDP-L-rhamnose. Also, if \[^{14}C\]-dTDP-4-keto-6-deoxyglucose (prepared from \[^{14}C\]-α-D-glucose-1-phosphate by the reactions catalyzed by RfbA and RfbB; see Section 2.2–2.3) was incubated with cell-free extracts of *S. griseus* N2-3-11 from various culture states and for various incubation times using the same test conditions only \[^{14}C\]-dTDP-L-rhamnose was yielded in all cases. Thus, no evidence for the presence of a dTDP-L-dihydrostreptose synthase with the same properties as a dTDP-L-rhamnose synthase (*Grisebach*, 1978; *Wahl and Grisebach*, 1979) could be detected in STR-producing *S. griseus*.

### 2.6. L-glutamine:scyllo-inosose aminotransferase StsC (EC 2.6.1.50) from *Streptomyces griseus* subsp. *griseus* DSM 40236

During the pioneering work on streptidine biosynthesis by Walker and collaborators (see overview in *Walker*, 1975a), the two aminotransferase (AT) activities needed for the introduction of two amino groups into the cyclitol moiety were identified. It turned out that the first step was dependent on L-glutamine as an amino donor and that unusually the alpha amino group of this amino acid was the donor group transferred, whereas in the second step L-alanine was the donor (*Walker*, 1975b,c). The first step, catalyzed by L-glutamine:scyllo-inosose (2,4,6/3,5-pentahydroxycyclohexanone) AT (EC 2.6.1.50), was correlated with a particular enzyme protein and gene product (StsC) only after most of the DNA sequence of the *str/sts*-cluster from the producer *S. griseus* and methods for overproduction of genetically engineered streptomycete genes became available (*Ahler et al.*, 1997; *Hopwood et al.*, 1985). Since the *str/sts*-cluster contains three AT genes, *stsS*, *stsA*, and *stsC*, identification of the first-step cyclitol AT had to include all three encoded enzymes. For this purpose, the three genes were subcloned in expression vectors for both *E. coli* BL21(DE3) (employing vectors pET11a, pET16b) and *Streptomyces lividans* (pIJ6021) (*Takano et al.*, 1995), and introduced by transformation and overexpressed in both host systems. Except for low amounts of StsA, only insoluble inclusion bodies of all three proteins were obtained in *E. coli*. However, reasonable amounts of soluble protein of all three enzymes were yielded in the streptomycete host. In our laboratory, the three *in vitro* test systems described by Walker and coworkers (*Walker*, 1975b; *Lucher et al.*, 1989) were used in all

investigations of the StsC enzyme (Ahlert *et al.*, 1997): (1) for the qualitative measurement of this AT the monoamino product scyllo-inosamine (1-amino-1-deoxy-scyllo-inositol) and of the alpha-ketoglutarate (2-oxoglutarate) byproduct of the forward reaction were measured, when 2-deoxy-scyllo-inosose and L-glutamine were used as substrates; (2) for higher sensitivity the radioactive exchange reaction between \[^{14}C\]-labeled scyllo-inosamine and nonlabeled scyllo-inosose (backward reaction) was employed; (3) the forward reaction was also measured by use of \[^{14}C\]-scyllo-inosose as acceptor substrate in a test system similar to the first one, where the product, \[^{14}C\]-labeled scyllo-inosamine was separated from the substrate by cation-exchange chromatography on Dowex 50W-X8. Later it was found that all the aminotransferases involved in the biosynthesis of the diaminocyclitol 2DOS (1-amino-1,2-dideoxy-scyllo-inositol; see Section 1.1 and Fig. 19.2) use the same mechanism as StsC and, based on primary structure similarity, are in the same subfamily of the aminotransferase I–II superfamily (Lucher *et al.*, 1989; Piepersberg *et al.*, 2007).

### 2.7. L-arginine:scyllo-inosamine-phosphate amidinotransferase StrB1 from *Streptomyces griseus* subsp. *griseus* DSM 40236 (ATCC 10137)

During the pioneering work on streptidine biosynthesis by Walker and collaborators (Walker, 1975a,d) the two amidinotransferase activities involved in this branch of the STR pathway were first identified and *in vitro* test systems described. Later work on these enzymes always relied on the nonspecific test system developed by these authors, which uses hydroxylamine as acceptor and L-arginine as donor substrates and yields hydroxyguanidine as the product. Later a well characterized mutant strain (SD141) blocked in the first step amidinotransferase activity was also isolated from the wildtype strain of *Streptomyces griseus* subsp. *griseus* ATCC 10137 by others (Ohnuki *et al.*, 1985). This mutant was subsequently used to identify the encoding gene, *strB1*, on cloned DNA from the same organism. The DNA sequence and regulation of transcriptional activity of this and the surrounding genes became available in genetic studies (Distler *et al.*, 1987, 1992). More recently the crystal structure of the StrB1 protein was also determined (Fritsche *et al.*, 1998).

### 2.8. Streptomycin-phosphate phosphatase StrK (EC 3.1.3.39) from *Streptomyces griseus* subsp. *griseus* DSM 40236 (ATCC 10137)

The gene clusters for the production of STRs, PAR, LIV, and APR each encode a gene, *strK*, *parZ*, *livZ*, and *aprZ*, for an extracellular phosphatase homologous to and perfectly matching the domain structure of alkaline

phosphatases (EC 3.1.3.39, alkPPc superfamily, pfam00245) (Mansouri *et al.*, 1991). The supernatants of S. griseus DSM 40236 strain N2-3-11, fermented in 10 l of solid-free TSB (Oxoid, Hamburg, Germany) as the production medium, was tested after various times of culturing for STR-phosphate phosphatase activity in the following way: assays contained in 100-$\mu$l volumes 30 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.0, 10 mM MgCl$_2$, 40 to 60 $\mu$M substrate, and variable quantities of supernatants cleared by centrifugation (or enzyme preparations); incubation was at 30°. Hydrolysis was measured by the phosphocellulose paper-binding assay (Haas and Dowding, 1975) in 10-$\mu$l aliquots taken at various times from the above incubation mixtures. As specific substrates $[^{32}$P$]$-labeled STR-6-phosphate and STR-3$''$-phosphate were prepared by use of the STR-resistance phosphotransferases AphD (APH(6)) and AphE (APH(3$''$)), both encoded in the same producer strain S. griseus N2-3-11, expressed from plasmids pJDM1 and pJDM40 as described (Distler and Piepersberg, 1985; Distler *et al.*, 1985; Heinzle *et al.*, 1988). After incubation these were separated from adenine nucleotides by passage over Dowex 1 × 8 (Serva, Heidelberg, FRG) and yielded specific radioactivities in the range of 10 to 20 $\mu$Ci/$\mu$ mol. STR-phosphate-specific phosphatase was partially purified from culture supernatants of S. griseus N2-3-11 by 70% ammonium sulphate precipitation followed by octyl-sepharose (Pharmacia, Freiburg, FRG) column chromatography (the enzyme was bound in the presence of 30% ammonium sulphate and was eluted with salt-free buffer). Also, StrK was cloned into Streptomyces vector pIJ702 (Katz *et al.*, 1983) and expressed from the promoter of the *mel* gene in pKMWK1/S. lividans 66 strain TK23, then tested in its supernatant in the same way as above. STR-phosphate phosphatase activity first appeared 25 h after inoculation in the culture supernatant of S. griseus N2-3-11 and preceded the first appearance of STR, then paralleling the accumulation of the antibiotic and an increase of the pH to 8.5 in the medium. Maximum relative activity of STR-6-phosphate phosphatase was reached at a value of about 85% hydrolysis in a standard assay (40 $\mu$l supernatant; incubation time 30 min). The hydrolysis of STR-6-phosphate was about sixfold faster than that of STR-3$''$-phosphate. The enzyme was inactivated by temperatures above 60° and pH values below 7.0. Obviously, only very little StrK protein was made, since after enrichment no protein band of the expected size could be detected in polyacrylamide gels. The same enzyme in comparable relative activities was secreted into culture supernatants of S. lividans/pKMWK1 (*strK*). In contrast, the culture of the control strain (S. lividans/pIJ702) was free of any comparable phosphatase activity (Mansouri *et al.*, 1991). Therefore, StrK was interpreted to be an alkaline phosphatase specific for STR phosphates (EC 3.1.3.39).

2.9. Myo-inositol-2-dedydrogenase (IDH; scyllo-inosose synthase) ForG (EC 1.1.1.18) from Micromonospora olivasterospora DSM 43868

In the FOR-production gene clusters (Table 19.1) a gene, *forG*, was found to encode a protein with highest similarity to possible IDH candidates encoded by the genomes of *S. coelicolor* A3(2) (e.g., 50% aa identity to SCO6255) and other actinomycetes. To test for this possibility we cloned, expressed, and assayed the ForG protein and knocked-out the *forG*-gene in the producer strain (Schuermann, B., Wehmeier, U. F., and Piepersberg, W., unpublished): The gene was amplified by PCR, using primers that introduced useful single restriction sites at both ends of the reading frame, cloned into various plasmid vectors and expression strains of *E. coli* and *S. lividans* 66, which were tested for overproduction of the soluble ForG protein. This goal could be achieved best in *E. coli* BL21(DE)-Rosetta/pBSW3-forG (vector pET16b; Novagen, Darmstadt, Germany; *forG*-ORF N-terminally elongated by His-tag) by demonstrating a new band of approximately 40 kDa (calculated MW of native protein 36.8 kDa) in the supernatant of the crude extract after induction on protein gels (Schägger and von Jagow, 1987). Preparation of enriched His-tag-ForG was achieved by Ni-NTA affinity chromatography. The ForG protein was tested for IDH activity by either (1) monitoring the absorption at 340 nm in 1-ml assay volumes containing 40 mM *myo*-inositol, 0.5 mM NAD⁺, 100 mM Tris/HCl (pH 9.0), and various concentrations of enzyme preparations; or (2) by measuring the absorption at 570 nm in a more sensitive MTT-test (according to Lengeler and Lin, 1972) consisting of 600 μl mix A (3.3 ml 1 M Tris/HCl, pH 9; 0.7 ml MTT (= (3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl])-2,5-diphenyltetrazoliumbromide, 0.5 mg/ml); 0.02 ml Triton X-100; 3 ml H₂O), 100 μl 0.4 M *myo*-inositol, 10 μl 0.5 mM NAD⁺, 100 μl 5-methylphenaziniummethosulfate (1 mg/ml), and 10 to 40 μl enzyme preparation. As controls, assays containing 0.1 U of commercial IDH (from Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany) were also run. For direct detection and quantitation of newly formed scyllo-inosose, ion chromatography (DIONEX DX-500 system with electrochemical detector, and column material CarboPac MA1, and Chromelion 6.2 software, Dionex, Idstein, Germany) was employed. The results are summarized as follows: (1) ForG expression significantly enhanced background IDH activity in both *E. coli* and *S. lividans* (up to 20-fold); (2) an enrichment factor of 20-fold was again achieved after Ni-NTA chromatography; and (3) the ForG product was identified as scyllo-inosose by ion chromatography. Also, *forG* knock-out mutants were constructed by replacement of a 200-bp segment internal to the *forG* gene by the omega-*aacC4* APR-resistance cassette (Blondelet-Rounault *et al.*, 1997) in plasmid pBSW2 and by its introduction by transformation into protoplasts of the FOR-producer *M.* olivasterospora

DSM 43868 according to a published method (Hasegawa *et al.*, 1991). APR-resistant transformants generated by double crossing over with the native *forG* gene could be selected in which the native *forG*-gene had been knocked out, as proven by CR-experiments. These mutants no longer produced FOR (compared to the wildtype strain DSM 43868) as could be measured by lack of inhibition zone formation around agar plugs cut from fully grown plate cultures on a production medium (ATCC no. 5) and placed on fresh plates inoculated with spores of *Bacillus subtilis* as a tester strain. Therefore, the *forG*-gene is essential for FOR-production.

### 2.10. Glycosyltransferases involved in CAG pathways

The glycosyltransferases (GTs) involved in the STR-related (Ca-6DOH) biosynthetic pathways are uncharacterized and practically nonidentified among the gene products of the respective gene clusters (*str/sts*, *spc*, and *kas*). For instance, in the case of the STR pathway of *S.* griseus, for which two GTs are necessary, StsF is the only candidate protein with some distant similarity to known GTs. The SpcF and KasA proteins are more reliable candidate GTs for the single glycosyltransfer steps involved in the SPC- and KAS-pathways, respectively (Piepersberget *al.*, 2007). In this respect, better data are available for the biosyntheses of 2DOS-containing and related CAGs (see also Chapter 20). These are mostly Cb1 pathways (a few exceptions are made via the Ca pathway, e.g., FOR), in which an enzyme family of GTs, the strongly related “M-enzymes” (e.g., KanM, NeoM, ForM; glycosyltransferases group 1; database accession: InterPro: IPR001296, pfam PF00534, Glycos_transf_1; e.g., KanM belonging to the cluster COG0438 of RfaG-like GTs), catalyze the first attachment of a sugar residue, 2-NAc-D-glucosaminyl, to position 4 of an aminocyclitol unit. The aminocyclitol is the diaminoacylitol 2DOS in the NEO-, KAN-, and HYG-B-related families; however, it can also be a monoaminocyclitol, scyllo-inosamine or 2-deoxy-scyllo-inosamine, as in the FOR- and IST-pathways, respectively (see Section 1.1). Several members of the “M”-enzymes and of the deacetylases, deacetylating NAc-glucosaminyl moieties are subsequently used in the respective pathways. Interestingly, the second N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase in the NEO-type pathways, NeoF, and related “F”-enzymes in the BTR-, PAR-, and LIV-pathways, are not members of the “M”-type subfamily of group 1 GTs, whereas the second GTs used in the KAN/GEN-type pathways (e.g., KanM2, are, though they are transferases for glucosyl- or xylosyl-residues). From the KAN and NEO pathways the following gene products have been studied in a comparative investigation in our laboratory and tested for enzymatic activity (Mandt, C., Wehmeier, U. F., and Piepersberg, W., unpublished data).

Generally, for the genes *kanM1*, *kanN*, and *kanM2* from the KAN producer *Streptomyces kanamyceticus* DSM 40500, the following cloning
strategy was employed. Genes were amplified from the genomic DNA of the wildtype CAG-producing strains as their ORFs by PCR using primers introducing unique restriction sites at both ends and ATG start codons, where GTG start codons are naturally present. PCR fragments were cloned into suitable *E. coli* selection plasmids, such as pUCPU21 (Wehmeier, U. F., unpublished), screened on X-Gal in *E. coli* DH5α and checked by sequencing. The respective genes were then subcloned into suitable *E. coli/* *Streptomyces* shuttle and expression vectors, such as pUWL201PW (*Doumith et al.*, 2000) or pJOE2775 (*Khalameyzer et al.*, 1999), or into *Streptomyces* vectors, such as pMACP (Wehmeier, U. F., unpublished), which can be transferred by conjugation from *E. coli* ET12567/pUZ8002 to *Streptomyces* spp. and allow expression there. For comparative purposes, the same cloning and expression strategy was used for *neoM*, *neoF*, and *neoD*, from the NEO producer *S.* *fradiae* DSM 40063.

### 2.11. KanM1, KanM2, and KanN of S. kanamyceticus DSM 40500

KanM1 and KanM2 had been postulated to be the first and second step GTs forming a pseudotrisaccharic intermediate (6-O-Glc-paromamine) via 4-O-NAc-D-glucosaminylation (2′-NAc-paromamine synthase) and 6-O-D-glucosylation of 2DOS, using UDP-2-NAc-D-glucosamine and UDP-D-glucose as donor substrates, respectively. KanN was assumed to be a monofunctional deacetylase deacetylating 2′-NAc-paromamine in the KAN-pathway; in contrast, the related deacetylase, NeoD, was shown to be a bifunctional N-deacetylase deacetylating both NAc-D-glucosaminyl residues during the formation of 6‴-hydroxy-NEO-C, that is, in 2′-NAc-paromamine, and in 2‴-NAc-6‴-hydroxy-NEO-C (*Lewellyn and Spencer*, 2006; *Yokoyama et al.*, 2008). Structurally, both KanN and NeoD are members of the LmbE-related protein family (COG2120; pfam02585, PIG-L, GlcNAc-PI de-N-acetylase family). KanM1, KanN, NeoM, NeoF, and NeoD from the producer strains *S.* *kanamyceticus* and *S.* *fradiae* could be actively overexpressed, whereas KanM2 could only be expressed as insoluble protein aggregates and did not show enzymatic activity under the tested conditions.

For testing the KanM1 and NeoM activities in cell-free extracts of the expression strains *S.* *lividans* 66 TK64/pCM201PW-kanM1 and *S.* *lividans* TK23/pCMW-neoM as compared to the background activity in the recipient strain plus vector plasmid (*S.* *lividans* TK23/pUWL201PW), assays of 300 μl of total volume contained 50 mM Tris/HCl, 10 mM MgCl₂, 2 mM UDP-2-NAc-D-glucosamine, 1 mM 2DOS, and 30 μl of cell-free extract, pH 7.5 by incubation at 37°C for up to 6 h. The result clearly revealed a conversion of 2DOS (RF 0.53) and UDP-NAc-D-glucosamine to 2′-NAc-paromamine (RF 0.59); paromamine had an RF of 0.22 in the same TLC separation system (TLC plates were Silica Gel F₂₅₄, Merck, Darmstadt,Germany; running solution was 50 mM KH₂PO₄); spots were visualized after development of plates by spraying with ninhydrin-solution and subsequent heating with a heat gun.

Similarly, NeoF was tested for the third GT activity of the NEO-pathway (2-NAc-glucosaminyltransferases II, 3″-NAc-glucosamination; cf. structure of NEO-C in Fig. 19.1) in extracts of *S. lividans* TK23/pCMW-neoF with ribostamycin (5-ribosylparomamine; RF 0.40) as acceptor and UDP-NAc-D-glucosamine as donor substrates. The result was the detection of a new spot (RF 0.48; interpreted to be 2″′-NAc-NEO-C), in the TLC system used (run in a solution of methanol/chloroform/12.5 % (w/v) ammonia in water = 1/0.2/1; visualization of spots was as for NeoM assays). The product obtained in the NeoF assays was used as substrate in deacetylation assays with KanN and NeoD.

The deacetylating activities of the proteins KanN and NeoD were tested by adding samples of cell-free extracts of the expression strain *E. coli* DH5α/pCMJOE-kanD to various GT-assays, after being fully converted. Enzyme assays were incubated overnight at 37° in a total volume of 300 μl containing 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.6, 10 mM MgCl₂, 60 μl of KanM- or NeoF-assay and 30 μl of cell-free supernatant with enriched NeoD. Aliquots of 2 μl of this enzyme assay were spotted on TLC plates (silica gel F₂₅₄, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) run in a solution of 50 mM KH₂PO₄, and visualized by spraying with ninhydrin-solution and subsequent heating with a heat gun. NeoD hydrolyzed both acetylated substrates to paromamine and NEO-C, respectively, thereby proving to be at least a bifunctional enzyme with a broader substrate range. KanN deacetylated only 2′-NAc-paromamine, but not 2″′-NAc-NEO-C, proving it to be a monofunctional deacetylase with a more restricted substrate range relative to NeoD. Kudo and Eguchi and collaborators recently published similar data for the same set of glycosyltransferase/deacetylase enzymes from the NEO-pathway ([Yokoyama et al., 2008](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-76584-5_20); see Chapter 20 in this volume).

### 3. ACARBOSE AND RELATED METABOLITES

Acarbose (ACB; [Fig. 19.1](#fig:19.1)) is a pseudotetrasaccharide composed of the C7-cyclitol valienamine, 4,6-dideoxyglucose and maltose that is found, together with higher homologues (i.e., ACB-containing metabolites elongated up to 30 sugar residues bound to the maltose moiety and/or at C4 of the cyclitol; see [Fig. 19.1](#fig:19.1)) in the culture medium of *Actinoplanes* sp. SE50/110 when grown on starch or malto-oligosaccharides (reviewed in [Wehmeier and Piepersberg, 2004](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1388-1785(03)00076-5)). Similar secondary metabolites seem to be made by a wide range of bacteria, including nonactinomycetes ([Mahmud et al., 2007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiotec.2007.01.016)). ACB is produced industrially using developed strains of *Actinoplanes* sp. SE50/110,and it is used pharmaceutically (Glucobay/Precose) in the treatment of diabetes patients, to slow down the intestinal release of glucose. The ACB gene cluster from *Actinoplanes* sp. SE50/110 was identified and sequenced ([Wehmeier, 2003; Wehmeier and Piepersberg, 2004; see Table 19.1]). The 25 known *acb* genes from the producer strain *Actinoplanes* sp. SE50/110 encode various functions, including biosynthesis of a 6-deoxyhexose (6DOH) and a C7-cyclitol (valienol; a Cb2 product), intra- and extra-cellular anabolism and catabolism of alpha-1,4-glucosides, and uptake and export of (oligo)-saccharides. Recently, a second ACB biosynthetic gene cluster from *Streptomyces glaucescens* (*gac* cluster) was identified and sequenced (AM409314) ([Rockser and Wehmeier, 2008]). The differences between the set of encoded proteins in the *acb* and *gac* gene clusters indicate that (1) there is a major difference between the routes for C7-cyclitol formation (see Section 3.1) and (2) that a homologue of the acarviosyltransferase (AcbD) (see Section 3.2.1), an important enzyme in the extracellular metabolism of ACB, seems to be lacking in *S. glaucescens* GLA.0. This indicates not only that the latter strain produces a different metabolite spectrum compared to *Actinoplanes* sp. SE50/110, but also that the *gac* cluster encodes exporters, extracellular and ACB-insensitive starch-degrading enzymes, an ACB-specific importer, an intracellular amylomaltase, and an ACB kinase. We postulate that all these findings suggest a function of ACB and related compounds as a carbophor, that is, as an extracellular trap for glucose or malto-oligosaccharides, which, when attached to it, can only be imported and metabolically used by the various molecular tools provided by the *acb* or *gac* clusters and maybe its analogues, such as the *val* cluster in *S. hygroscopicus* ssp. *limoneus* IFO 12704 (see Section 3.2).

## 3.1. The synthesis and modification of C7-cyclitols

The Cb2 metabolite 2-*epi*-5-*epi*-valiolone is the common C7 cyclitol precursor in ACB (amylostatins), validamycins, and other biosynthetic pathways ([Stratmann et al., 1999; reviewed in Wu et al., 2007]). 2-*epi*-5-*epi*-valiolone is synthesized from sedo-heptulose-7P by 2-*epi*-5-*epi*-valiolone synthases. The AcbC protein from *Actinoplanes* was the first member of this enzyme family to be studied ([Stratmann et al., 1999]). The sequence similarity of AcbC to the AroB-related DHQS proteins, cyclizing 3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate 7-phosphate (DAHP) to dehydroquinate, suggested that this enzyme family catalyzes synthesis of the C7-cyclitol. The enzymatic activity of AcbC was proven using the AcbC protein enriched in extracts from strain *S. lividans* 1326/pAS8/7 (an overexpressing plasmid clone of *acbC* in vector pIJ6021) ([Takano et al., 1995]), which was shown to cyclize sedoheptulose 7-phosphate, but no other heptulose-7-P ([Stratmann et al., 1999]). The enzyme assay was carried out at 30° in a 100-μl volume containing 20 mM potassium phosphate (pH 7.4), 0.05 mM CoCl₂, 2 mM KF, 1 mM NADH, 5 mM sedoheptulose 7-phosphate, and 100 μg of protein.The reaction of C7-cyclitol cyclases could be monitored by thin-layer chromatography analysis (solvent system, $n$-butanol:ethanol:$\mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O}$, 9:7:4). The product had the same properties as synthetic 2-epi-5-epi-[6-$^{2} \mathrm{H}_{2}$]valiolone (Stratmann *et al.*, 1999). Using the *acbC* gene as a probe, a number of gene clusters for C7-cyclitol containing metabolites have been identified, such as the gene clusters for validamycin A (VAL) (Bai *et al.*, 2006; Singh *et al.*, 2006; Wu *et al.*, 2007). Meanwhile, a number of AcbC-like proteins have been identified and active site residues from the available 2-epi-5-epi-valiolone synthases revealed striking dissimilarities with DHQ synthases because one-third of the active-site residues are consistently altered in 2-epi-5-epi-valiolone synthases (Wu *et al.*, 2007). The next steps after the cyclization obviously differ remarkably in the various pathways. For the biosynthesis of ACB in *Actinoplanes*, Zhang *et al.* (2002) have shown that 2-epi-5-epi-valiolone is phosphorylated to 2-epi-5-epi-valiolone-7-P by the enzyme AcbM (tested in 25 mM Tris-HCl, 10 mM MgCl$_{2}$, [20 mM NH$_{4}$Cl] 10 mM 2-epi-5-epi-valiolone adjusted to pH 7.6, using cell free extracts from *S*. *lividans* TK64 harboring plasmids pCW4123M) (Zhang *et al.*, 2002) and then 2-epi-5-epi-valiolone-7-P is epimerized to 5-epi-valiolone-7-P by AcbO, a new type of epimerase, which is obviously cofactor independent (Zhang *et al.*, 2003). The assays with AcbO were performed under the same conditions described above for AcbM using 2-epi-5-epi-valiolone-7-P as substrate and cell-free extract from *S*. *lividans* TK64/pMJO7 (Zhang *et al.*, 2003). In the biosynthesis of VAL, 2-epi-5-epi-valiolone is first epimerized to 5-epi-valiolone, and then water is eliminated to give valienone. These two steps are catalyzed by the bifunctional enzymes (epimerase/dehydratase) ValK (*val* gene cluster from *Streptomyces hygroscopicus* 5008) (Bai *et al.*, 2006) or VldD (*vld* gene cluster from *Streptomyces hygroscopicus* var. *limoneus* IFO 12703) (Singh *et al.*, 2006), respectively. Then valienone is phosphorylated to valienone-7-P by a cyclitol kinase (Bai *et al.*, 2006; Singh *et al.*, 2006). Valienone-7-P is the precursor for both cyclitol moieties of validoxamine A, the unglycosylated precursor of validamycin A. In the *S*. *glaucescens* pathway for ACB, obviously a third variant is realized, where 2-epi-5-epi-valiolone is first epimerized by an epimerase GacJ and then water is eliminated, and the keto-group at C1 is reduced by the enzyme GacO (dehydratase/dehydrogenase) to give 1-epi-valienol, which is then phosphorylated by GacM to 1-epi-valienol-7-P (Rockser and Wehmeier, 2008). According to the proposals for ACB biosynthesis, the cyclitol is then activated by nucleotidyl-transferases, AcbR or GacR, respectively. The activation of the cyclitol is obviously conserved in a number of C7-cyclitol pathways, as related nucleotidyltransferases are also encoded by the gene clusters for the biosynthetic routes for validamycins (Bai *et al.*, 2006; Singh *et al.*, 2006). NDP-1-epi-valienol-7-P is then transferred to a TDP-4-amino-4,6-deoxy-glucose by the glycosyltransferases (AcbI/GacI) to form acarviosine-7-P (Wehmeier and Piepersberg,
2004; Rockser and Wehmeier, 2008). TDP-4-amino-4,6-deoxy-glucose is synthesized using the standard biosynthetic routes for deoxyglucose. The genes *acbA/gacA* and *acbB/gacB* encode the TDP-glucose synthase (EC 2.7.7.24; AcbA/GacA) and the TDP-glucose-4,6-dehydratase (EC 4.2.1.46; AcbB/GacB), respectively. The enzymes are equivalent to StrD/E described in Section 2.2–2.3. The final modification step in this sugar pathway leading to TDP-4-amino-4,6-dideoxy-glucose is an amination catalyzed by AcbV/GacV. The enzymatic activity of AcbV was shown using dTDP-4,6-dideoxy-glucose as a substrate (Diaz-Guardamino, M., and Piepersberg, W., unpublished). The enzymatic reaction was carried out in 100 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.5) containing 4 mM dTDP-4-amino-4,6-dideoxy-glucose, 8 mM L-glutamic acid and 1 mM pyridoxal phosphate. The activities can be measured photometrically at λ 340 nm in a coupled assay with the α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase, which converts α-ketoglutarate in the presence of NAD and coenzyme A to succinyl-CoA. A HPLC-system was established by Chung et al. (2007), who analyzed the aminotransferase GerB, which is highly related to AcbV/GacV. The enzyme GerB also was characterized as a dTDP-4-amino-4,6-dideoxy-glucose-aminotransferase.

Finally, two glucose moieties are attached to acarviosine-7-P by a second glycosyltransferase (*AcbS/GacS*). It is still not clear if *AcbS/GacS* transfer a glucose molecule twice or just a maltose. The last step is the export of ACB-7-P by the ABC exporters *AcbWXY* or *GacWXY*, respectively, and unphosphorylated ACB is released (Wehmeier and Piepersberg, 2004; see Fig. 19.3).

## 3.2. The biochemistry of carbophors: A unique system for the acquisition of glucose from starch in actinomycetes

Since ACB is produced as part of a mixture of compounds differing by the number of α-1,4-bound glucose residues at both the reducing and the nonreducing ends, we hypothesize that despite its activity as an inhibitor of α-glucosidases, the benefits of ACB for the producing organism might stem from another function. We proposed that ACB and related compounds might function as “carbophors” (in analogy to the well-known siderophores): these metabolites are produced in order to prevent competitors in the natural habitat from utilizing starch as a carbon and energy source (Zhang et al., 2002; Wehmeier and Piepersberg, 2004). This could be achieved by their function as potent inhibitors of α-glucosidases and of transport systems mediating the uptake of malto-oligosaccharides. Increasing amounts of extracellular, unbound ACB could be used as acceptor molecules for the covalent binding by transglycosylation of glucose or malto-oligosaccharides by the action of the acarviosyltransferase, *AcbD*, and/or other extracellular α-glucosidases with high transglycosylation potency. The resulting longer homologues would be transported into the

Figure 19.3 Schematic representation of the “carbophor” function of ACB. The figure illustrates schematically the biosynthesis and export of ACB, the extracellular modification, the reimport of higher ACB homologues and the intracellular ACB cycle in *Actino-planes* sp. SE50/110 (*acb* cluster, Acb enzymes). The enzymes involved in the respective steps are indicated; for details see text. A similar carbophor cycle is encoded by the *gac* cluster from *S. glaucescens* GLA.O (see text).

cytoplasm by a specific importer system, where they would first become phosphorylated by an ACB kinase (AcbK/GacK) and then glucose units would be released and shuttled into metabolism (Fig. 19.3). Free ACB would be released to the environment again by an ACB exporter. The available biochemical data for Acb/Gac-proteins, which provide evidence for and could be involved in the carbophor cycle, are summarized here.

### 3.2.1. The acarviosyl transferase AcbD

The acarviosyl transferase AcbD (Atase, EC2.4.1.19), encoded by the *acb* cluster of *Actinoplanes* sp. SE50/110, is a 76-kDa extracellular enzyme from *Actinoplanes* sp. SE50/110 that transfers the acarviosyl moiety from ACB to the 4-hydroxyl group of various sugars ([Hemker et al., 2001](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi00284a016); [Leemhuis et al., 2004](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi049856m); Wehmeier, U. F., and Rockser, Y., unpublished). ATase has highest similarity to cyclodextrin glucanotransferases (CGTases), e.g., 42% sequence identity to CGTase from *Thermoanaerobacterium thermosulfurigenes* (P26827). Sequence alignments of AcbD with various α-amylase family enzymes revealed that the four short-sequence regions (I–IV) characteristic of the α-amylase family ([Nakamura et al., 1993](https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-2836(93)90374-O); [Soogard et al., 1993](https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-2836(93)90375-P); [Uitdehaag et al., 1999](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-2836(99)80004-5)) are present in ATase. Therefore, it was assumed
that the catalytic site architecture of AcbD is similar to those of other $\alpha$-amylase family enzymes, and that the preference for ACB is probably the result of relatively small differences (e.g., point mutations) in or close to its active site ([Leemhuis *et al.*, 2004](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0405869101)). It was shown by site-directed mutagenesis that the replacement of Gly140His and/or Gln327His change the specificity of Atase dramatically: The enzyme loses its ACB resistance and Atase function and gains CGTase and $\alpha$-glucosidase activities ([Leemhuis *et al.*, 2004](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0405869101)). From these observations, it was assumed that the presence of the His residues mentioned above at these positions is responsible for ACB sensitivity of $\alpha$-glucosidic enzymes. However, the ACB resistant $\alpha$-amylases AcbE and AcbZ encoded by the $acb$ gene cluster and also the $\alpha$-glucosidases and $\alpha$-amylases encoded by the $gac$ cluster from S. glaucescens GLA.O all contain His residues at these respective positions, and have the active site almost completely conserved when compared to other $\alpha$-amylases. Thus, the origin of ACB resistance is still unclear.

The $acbD$ gene has been cloned and the secreted ATase AcbD was overproduced well in S. lividans strain TK23 when using the E. coli/ actinomycete shuttle vector pUWL201PW-AT ([Leemhuis *et al.*, 2004](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0405869101)). Acarviosyl transferase activity was found in the culture medium, demonstrating that the signal sequence of ATase is also recognized by S. lividans. The ATase protein can be purified from the culture medium using a standard His-tag purification protocol, yielding about 4 mg of ATase protein per liter of culture ([Leemhuis *et al.*, 2004](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0405869101); Rockser and Wehmeier, unpublished). For the expression and purification of AcbD the culture was inoculated by a single colony directly after transformation and grown in Cerestar medium (Cerestar-malto-oligodextrins, 70 g; $(\mathrm{NH}_{4}) \mathrm{SO}_{4}$, 5g; yeast extract, 2 g; $\mathrm{K}_{2} \mathrm{HPO}_{4}, 1 \mathrm{~g}$; $\mathrm{KH}_{2} \mathrm{PO}_{4}, 1 \mathrm{~g}$; tri-sodium citrate, 5 g; $\mathrm{MgCL}_{2} \times 6 \mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O}, 1 \mathrm{~g}$; $\mathrm{FeCL}_{3} \times 6 \mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O}, 0.25 \mathrm{~g}$; and $\mathrm{CaCl}_{2} \times 2 \mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O}, 2 \mathrm{~g}$; all components dissolved in $1.2 \mathrm{l}$ distilled $\mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O}$ and sterilized by filtration) for $72 \mathrm{~h}$ at $30^{\circ}$ on a rotary shaker at $180 \mathrm{rpm}$. The mycelium was removed by centrifugation and the supernatant was filtered by gravity through glass fibers. Subsequently, $1 \mathrm{ml}$ NiNTA Agarose suspension (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to $100 \mathrm{ml}$ of supernatant and then filled up with Tris-HCl (pH 7.5, final concentration $20 \mathrm{mM}), \mathrm{NaCl}(250 \mathrm{mM})$, and imidazole ($10 \mathrm{mM}$ ). This mixture was incubated at $4^{\circ}$ for 4 h with gentle agitation. Then the NiNTA-agarose was washed twice with five volumes of buffer 2 ($20 \mathrm{mM}$ Tris-Cl, pH 7.5; $250 \mathrm{mM} \mathrm{NaCl}$; $10 \mathrm{mM}$ imidazole; and $1 \mathrm{mM} \mathrm{CaCl}_{2}$ ). The AcbD protein was eluted with the same buffer containing $250 \mathrm{mM}$ imidazole.

AcbD assays are carried out in Tris-HCl buffer ($20 \mathrm{mM}$, pH 7.5) supplemented with $1 \mathrm{mM} \mathrm{CaCl}_{2}$ at $30^{\circ}$. AcbD activity was determined by measuring the transfer rate of the acarviosyl moiety from ACB (donor substrate) to malto-oligosaccharides (acceptor substrates). Reaction mixtures contained 1 to $20 \mathrm{mM}$ ACB, $10 \mathrm{mM}$ malto-oligosaccharides andabout 10 $\mu$g of enzyme per milliliter. Reactions are started by adding enzyme and incubated for 1 to 4 h, then stopped by boiling samples for 5 min. The reactions can be monitored on Silica HPTLC plates (Merck) and should be run twice in acetonitrile/1-propanol/H₂O (9/5/7). Visualization of products is obtained by a methanol solution containing 0.3% (w/v) N-(1-naphthyl)ethylenediamine and 5% (v/v) H₂SO₄, followed by heating with a heat gun for a few minutes.

ACB, higher ACB homologues, and malto-oligosaccharides can be separated on an HPLC system according to Leemhuis *et al.* (2004), or using a CarboPac PA200 anion exchange column (250 × 4 mm) (Dionex, Idstein, Germany) coupled to a CarboPac1 guard column. With eluent A (sodium hydroxide, 0.1 mM) and eluent B (0.6 M sodium acetate in 0.1 M sodium hydroxide) using the following gradient: 0 min, 3% eluent B; 20 min, 30% B; 30 min, 100% B; 30 to 35 min 100% B; 35 min, 3% B; 35 to 47 min 3% B; and 47 min end of run. Detection was performed with an ED50 electrochemical detector (Dionex) with an Au working electrode and an Ag/AgCl reference electrode with a sensitivity of 300 nC. The following pulse program should be used: +0.1 volt (0 to 0.40 s); to 2.0 volts (0.41 to 0.42 s); +0.6 volt (0.43 to 0.44 s); and −0.1 volt (0.44 to 0.45 s).

### 3.2.2. Starch-degrading enzymes

*Actinoplanes* sp. SE50/110 produces two $\alpha$-amylases (EC3.2.1.1): AcbE (1038 aa) and AcbZ (1103 aa) which represent a new $\alpha$-glucosidase subfamily (Wehmeier, U. F., Merettig, N., and Rockser, Y., unpublished). They are long-chain acarbose-insensitive $\alpha$-amylases. The four conserved sequence motifs in the catalytic domain of $\alpha$-glucosidases and cyclodextrin synthases converting starch and maltodextrins and the three active site amino acid residues, D268, E302 and D375, the “catalytic triad” (Gilles *et al.*, 1996; Nakamura *et al.*, 1993; Soogard *et al.*, 1993; Uitdehaag *et al.*, 1999), are also conserved in AcbE and AcbZ. The activities of $\alpha$-amylase can be determined using standard $\alpha$-amylase tests with soluble starch and photometric detection, or the Dionex system described in Section 3.2.1 for AcbD. When using starch as a substrate, the degradation products produced by $\alpha$-amylases (maltose, maltotriose, or higher malto-oligosaccharides) can be detected. The activities of ACB-insensitive $\alpha$-amylases are determined in the presence of ACB (0.1 to 1 mM) and soluble starch (0.1 to 0.5% in the test). With 1 mM ACB AcbE and AcbZ still exhibit more than 70% catalytic activity while ACB-sensitive enzymes are completely inhibited at these concentrations.

Four $\alpha$-glucosidic enzymes are encoded by the *gac* gene cluster from *S. glaucescens* GLA.O: GacE1, GacE2, GacZ1, and GacZ2. The two $\alpha$-amylases GacZ1 and GacZ2 are related to long-chain $\alpha$-amylases and both also contain a pullulan-binding domain. GacE2 is a short-chain secreted $\alpha$-glucosidase, while the protein sequence from GacE1 contains
no signal peptide and seems to be a cytoplasmic enzyme. It remains to be shown if all these enzymes are ACB resistant. These *S. glaucescens* enzymes all contain the typical active sites found in all α-amylases or starch-degrading enzymes mentioned above and in Section 3.2.1 and, like AcbE and AcbZ from *Actinoplanes*, no changes are found within these active sites. We have first indications that GacE1 is a cytoplasmic ACB-resistant α-glucosidase and that the extracellular α-amylytic activities detected in the supernatant of *S. glaucescens* are insensitive toward ACB (Merettig, N., and Wehmeier, U. F., unpublished results).

### 3.2.3. Binding protein dependent ACB transporters

Within the *acb* and *gac* cluster putative gene sets (*acbHFG*, *gacFGH*) encoding components of ATP-binding cassette (ABC) import systems were found that consist of a membrane-bound solute-binding protein (AcbH/GacH) and two membrane-spanning subunits (AcbFG/GacFG). As often observed for sugar ABC transport systems of Gram-positive bacteria, a gene encoding an ATPase component is lacking ([Hurtubise et al., 1995](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.270.36.21280); [Schlösser et al., 1999](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.20.14189)). However, genes encoding ABC proteins (MsiK, multiple sugar import ATPase) ([Hurtubise et al., 1995](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.270.36.21280); [Schlösser et al., 1997](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.272.36.22789)), which are probably part of the transporter complexes, had also been identified in *Actinoplanes* (Elvers, D., Schäfer, G., Brunkhorst, C., and Schneider, E., unpublished) and *S. glaucescens* (Rockser, Y., and Wehmeier, U. F., unpublished). The homology to members of the CUT 1 (carbohydrate uptake transporter) subfamily, the members of which predominantly transport di- and oligo-saccharides, made the transporters AcbFGH/GacFGH candidates for ACB uptake systems. We have studied this hypothesis (Wehmeier, U. F., in collaboration with Licht, A., Weidlich, D., Scheffel, F., and Schneider, E., Humboldt University Berlin, Germany). We ([Brunkhorst et al., 2005](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M412378200)) have shown that (1) the product of the *acbH* gene is induced under the same conditions as other genes of the *acb* cluster, (2) AcbH is attached to the cytoplasmic membrane, and (3) the purified His10–AcbH fusion protein binds ACB and its longer derivatives but not maltodextrins via surface plasmon resonance. Thus, the substrate binding site of AcbH has apparently evolved in such a way that it can discriminate malto-oligosaccharides from pseudo-oligosaccharides. This is in contrast to maltose/maltodextrin binding proteins from *E. coli* and *Alicyclobacillus acidocaldarius*, which also bind ACB ([Brunkhorst et al., 1999](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.20.14189); [Hülsmann et al., 2000](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.275.20.15189)) and these data strongly support the carbophor model. Comparable data for GacH are still not available. The putative binding protein-dependent ABC-importer GacFGH from *S. glaucescens* is more related to maltose uptake systems from streptomycetes (45 to 60% identity to the maltose transporter MalFGH from *S. coelicolor* [NP626480—NP626482]) than to the relatives from *Actinoplanes* (only 22 to 25% identity). Therefore, it is still speculative which substrates are predominantly transported by the GacFGH-system. As
a homologue to the Atase AcbD is not encoded by the *gac* cluster; the strain apparently produces a differently composed mixture of metabolites, which is obviously also reflected in the importer.

### 3.2.4. Cytoplasmic enzymes involved in ACB metabolism

Two proteins are required to close the cytoplasmic ACB cycle, an amylo- maltase and an ACB kinase. Proteins for these functions are encoded by the genes *acbQ/gacQ* and *acbK/gacK*, respectively, in the two gene clusters investigated. It was first shown by Pape and coworkers that *Actinoplanes* sp. SE50/110 produces an enzyme phosphorylating ACB at the 7-position and that 7-phospho-ACB does not inhibit the cytoplasmic and ACB- sensitive amyломaltase activity of *Actinoplanes* sp. SE50/110 ([Goeke et al., 1996](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-2836(96)80003-6); [Drepper and Pape, 1996](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-2836(96)80004-8)). The respective enzyme AcbK is encoded by the *acb* cluster from *Actinoplanes* sp. SE50/110 and a homologue GacK by the *gac* cluster from *Streptomyces glaucescens* GLA.O. The activities of the ACB kinases were determined in assays in a total volume of 20 μl including 10 mM ACB (or ACB homologues synthesized with AcbD, see Section 3.2.1), 10 mM ATP, 10 mM MgCl₂, 20 mM NH₄CL, 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.6) using the enzymes overproduced in either *E. coli* BL21(DE3) or JM109 (DE3) (using pET11 or pET16 derivatives) or *S. lividans* TK23 or TK64 using the pUWL201 ([Doumith et al., 2000](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-7012(00)00101-0)) expression system. Both enzymes, AcbK and GacK, have been shown to phosphorylate ACB and also higher ACB homologues with similar rates ([Rockser and Wehmeier, 2008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiotec.2008.01.001), and unpublished results). Finally, the additional glucose residues of the 7-phospho-ACB homologues are hydrolyzed by the intracellular amy- ломaltases AcbQ or GacQ, respectively, being members of glycoside hydro- lase family 77 (EC 2.4.1.25). Although both enzymes share high similarity with α-glucanotransferases involved in starch metabolism (e.g., about 60% identical aa residues with 4-alpha-glucanotransferase of *Streptomyces coelicolor* A3(2); NP_626885), they obviously are members of a new subgroup within this enzyme family and only small changes are responsible for their different substrate specificity. AcbQ was overproduced in *E. coli* DH5α using the rhamnose-inducible promoter from pJOE2702 ([Volff et al., 1996](https://doi.org/10.1016/0167-7012(96)00002-6)). Prelimi- nary data indicate that phosphorylated higher ACB homologues are hydro- lyzed by AcbQ (Merettig, N., Y. Rockser, U. F. Wehmeier, unpublished). For these assays, AcbQ was incubated in buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 10 mM MgCl₂) with 10 mM substrate, and the hydrolysis of the substrates was analyzed by TLC according to [Hemker et al. (2001)](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-2836(01)00434-8). These data fit perfectly with our carbophor model.
# REFERENCES

Ahler, J., Distler, J., Mansouri, K., and Piepersberg, W. (1997). Identification of *stsC*, the gene encoding the L-glutamine:scyllo-inosose aminotransferase from streptomycin-producing streptomycetes. *Arch. Microbiol.* **168**, 102–113.

Arya, D. P., (ed.), (2007). *In* “Aminoglycoside antibiotics. From chemical biology to drug discovery.” Wiley-Interscience, Hoboken, NJ.

Bai, L., Li, L., Xu, H., Minagawa, K., Yu, Y., Zhang, Y., Zhou, X., Floss, H. G., Mahmud, T., and Deng, Z. (2006). Functional analysis of the validamycin biosynthetic gene cluster and engineered production of validoxylamine A. *Chem. Biol.* **13**, 387–397.

Beyer, S., Mayer, G., and Piepersberg, W. (1998). The StrQ protein encoded in the gene cluster for 5′-hydroxystreptomycin of *Streptomyces glaucescens* GLA 0 is an alpha-D-glucose-1-phosphate cytidylyltransferase (CDP-D-glucose synthase). *Eur. J. Biochem.* **258**, 1059–1067.

Blondelet-Rounault, M.-H., Weiser, J., Lebrihi, A., Branny, P., and Pernodet, J.-L. (1997). Antibiotic resistance gene cassettes derived from the Ω interposon for use in *E. coli* and *Streptomyces*. *Gene* **190**, 315–317.

Borovinskaya, M. A., Shoji, S., Fredrick, K., and Cate, J. H. D. (2008). Structural basis for hygromycin B inhibition of protein biosynthesis. *RNA* **14**, 1590–1599.

Brayer, G. D., Sidhu, G., Maurus, R., Rydberg, E. H., Braun, C., Wang, Y., Nguyen, N. T., Overall, C. M., and Withers, S. G. (2000). Subsite mapping of the human pancreatic alpha-amylase active site through structural, kinetic, and mutagenesis techniques. *Biochemistry* **39**, 4778–4791.

Brodersen, D. E., Clemons, W. M., Carter, A. P., Morgan-Warren, R. J., Wimberly, B. T., and Ramakrishnan, V. (2000). The structural basis for the action of the antibiotics tetracycline, pactamycin, and hygromycin B on the 30S ribosomal subunit. *Cell* **103**, 1143–1154.

Brunkhorst, C., Andersen, C., and Schneider, E. (1999). Acarbose, a pseudooligosaccharide, is transported but not metabolized by the maltose-maltodextrin system of *Escherichia coli*. *J. Bacteriol.* **181**, 2612–2619.

Brunkhorst, C., Wehmeier, U. F., Piepersberg, W., and Schneider, E. (2005). The *acbH* gene of *Actinoplanes sp.* encodes a solute receptor with binding activities for acarbose and longer homologs. *Res. Microbiol.* **156**, 322–327.

Carter, A. P., Clemons, W. M., Brodersen, D. E., Morgan-Warren, R. T., Wimberly, B. T., and Ramakrishnan, V. (2000). Functional insights from the structure of the 30S ribosomal subunit and its interactions with antibiotics. *Nature* **407**, 340–348.

Chung, Y. S., Kim, D. H., Seo, W. M., Lee, H. C., Liou, K., Oh, T. J., and Sohng, J. K. (2007). Enzymatic synthesis of dTDP-4-amino-4,6-dideoxy-D-glucose using GerB (dTDP-4-keto-6-deoxy-D-glucose aminotransferase). *Carbohydr. Res.* **342**, 1412–1418.

Distler, J., and Piepersberg, W. (1985). Cloning and characterisation of a gene from *Streptomyces griseus* coding for a streptomycin phosphorylating activity. *FEMS Microbiol. Lett.* **28**, 113–117.

Distler, J., Ebert, A., Mansouri, K., Pissowatzki, K., Stockmann, M., and Piepersberg, W. (1987). Gene cluster for streptomycin biosynthesis in *Streptomyces griseus*: Nucleotide sequence of three genes and analysis of transcriptional activity. *Nucleic Acids Res.* **15**, 8041–8056.

Distler, J., Mansouri, K., and Piepersberg, W. (1985). Streptomycin biosynthesis in *Streptomyces griseus* II: Adjacent genomic location of biosynthetic genes and one of two streptomycin resistance genes. *FEMS Microbiol. Lett.* **30**, 151–154.

Distler, J., Mansouri, K., Mayer, G., Stockmann, M., and Piepersberg, W. (1992). Streptomycin biosynthesis and its regulation in *Streptomycetes*. *Gene* **115**, 105–111.

Doumith, M., Weingarten, P., Wehmeier, U. F., Salah-Bey, K., Benhamou, B., Capdevila, C., Michel, J.-M., Piepersberg, W., and Raynal, M.-C. (2000). Analysis of genes involved in the 6-deoxyhexose biosynthesis and transfer in *Saccharopolyspora erythraea*. Mol. Gen. Genet. **264**, 477–485.

Drepper, A., and Pape, H. (1996). Acarbose 7-phosphotransferase from *Actinoplanes sp.*: Purification, properties, and possible physiological function. J. Antibiot. **49**, 664–668.

Eads, J. C., Beeby, M., Scapin, G., Yu, T. W., and Floss, H. G. (1999). Crystal structure of 3-amino-5-hydroxybenzoic acid (AHBA) synthase. Biochemistry **38**, 9840–9849.

Elling, L., Rupprath, C., Günther, N., Römer, U., Verseck, S., Weingarten, P., Dräger, G., Kirschning, A., and Wolfgang Piepersberg, W. (2005). An enzyme module system for the synthesis of dTDP-activated deoxysugars from dTMP and sucrose. ChemBioChem **6**, 1423–1430.

Fritsche, E., Bergner, A., Humm, A., Piepersberg, W., and Huber, R. (1998). Crystal structure of L-arginine:inosamine-phosphate amidinotransferase StrB1 from *Streptomyces griseus*: An enzyme involved in streptomycin biosynthesis. Biochemistry **37**, 17664–17672.

Gilles, C., Astier, J.-P., Marchis-Mouren, G., Cambillau, C., and Payan, F. (1996). Crystal structure of pig pancreatic α-amylase isoenzyme II, in complex with the carbohydrate inhibitor acarbose. Eur. J. Biochem. **238**, 561–569.

Goeke, K., Drepper, A., and Pape, H. (1996). Formation of acarbose phosphate by a cell-free extract from the acarbose producer *Actinoplanes sp.* J. Antibiot. **49**, 661–663.

Grisebach, H. G. (1978). Biosynthesis of sugar components of antibiotic substances. Adv. Carbohydr. Chem. Biochem. **35**, 81–126.

Haas, M. J., and Dowding, J. E. (1975). Aminoglycoside-modifying enzymes. Methods Enzymol. **43**, 611–633.

Hasegawa, M., Dairi, T., Ohta, T., and Hashimoto, E. (1991). A novel efficient gene-cloning system for *Micromonospora* strains. J. Bacteriol. **173**, 7004–7011.

Heinzel, P., Webritzky, O., Distler, J., and Piepersberg, W. (1988). A second streptomycin resistance gene from *Streptomyces griseus* codes for streptomycin 3″-phosphotransferase. Relationship between antibiotic and protein kinases. Arch. Microbiol. **150**, 184–192.

Hemker, M., Stratmann, A., Goeke, K., Schröder, W., Lenz, J., Piepersberg, W., and Pape, H. (2001). Identification, cloning, expression, and characterization of the extracellular acarbose-modifying glycosyltransferase, AcbD, from *Actinoplanes sp.* strain SE50. J. Bacteriol. **183**, 4484–4492.

Hopwood, D. A., Bibb, M. J., Chater, K. F., Kieser, T., Bruton, C. J., Kieser, H. M., Lydiate, D. J., Smith, C. P., Ward, J. M., and Schrempf, H. (1985). “Genetic manipulation of *Streptomyces*: A laboratory manual.” The John Innes Foundation, Norwich, UK.

Hülsmann, A., Lurz, R., Scheffel, F., and Schneider, E. (2000). Maltose and maltodextrin transport in the thermoacidophilic Gram-positive bacterium *Alicyclobacillus acidocaldarius* is mediated by a high-affinity transport system that includes a maltose-binding protein tolerant to low pH. J. Bacteriol. **182**, 6292–6301.

Hurtubise, Y., Shareck, F., Kluepfel, D., and Morosoli, R. (1995). A cellulase/xylanase-negative mutant of *Streptomyces lividans* 1326 defective in cellobiose and xylobiose uptake is mutated in a gene encoding a protein homologous to ATP-binding proteins. Mol. Microbiol. **17**, 367–377.

Kase, H., Odakura, Y., Takazawa, Y., Kitamura, S., and Nakayama, K. (1982). Biosynthesis of sagamicin and related aminoglycosides. In “Trends in Antibiotic Research: Genetics, Biosyntheses, Actions, and New Substances.” (H. Umezawa, A. L. Demain, T. Hata, and C. R. Hutchinson, eds.), pp. 195–212. Japan Antibiotics Research Association, Tokyo.

Katz, E., Thompson, C. J., and Hopwood, D. A. (1983). Cloning and expression of the tyrosinase gene from *Streptomyces antibioticus* in *Streptomyces lividans*. J. Gen. Microbiol. **129**, 2703–2714.

Khalameyzer, V., Fischer, I., Bornscheuer, U. T., and Altenbuchner, J. (1999). Screening, nucleotide sequence, and biochemical characterization of an esterase from *Pseudomonas fluorescens* with high activity towards lactones. *Appl. Environ. Microbiol.* **65**, 477–482.

Kharel, M. K., Subba, B., Lee, H. C., Liou, K., and Sohng, J. K. (2005). Characterization of L-glutamine:2-deoxy-scyllo-inosose aminotransferase (*tbmB*) from *Streptomyces tenebrarius*. *Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett.* **15**, 89–92.

Kudo, F., Fujii, T., Kinoshita, S., and Eguchi, T. (2007). Unique O-ribosylation in the biosynthesis of butirosin. *Bioorg. Med. Chem.* **15**, 4360–4368.

Kudo, F., Yamamoto, Y., Yokoyama, K., Eguchi, T., and Kakinuma, K. (2005). Biosynthesis of 2-deoxystreptamine by three crucial enzymes in *Streptomyces fradiae* NBRC 12773. *J. Antibiot.* **58**, 766–774.

Leenhuis, H., Wehmeier, U. F., and Dijkhuizen, L. (2004). Single mutation switches the reaction specificities of cyclodextrin glycosyltransferase and the acarbose modifying enzyme acarviosyl transferase. *Biochemistry* **43**, 13204–13213.

Lengeler, J., and Lin, E. C. C. (1972). Reversal of the mannitol-sorbitol diauxie in *Escherichia coli*. *J. Bacteriol.* **112**, 840–848.

Llewellyn, N. M., and Spencer, J. B. (2006). Biosynthesis of 2-deoxystreptamine-containing aminoglycoside antibiotics. *Nat. Prod. Rep.* **23**, 864–874.

Lucher, L. A., Chen, Y. M., and Walker, J. B. (1989). Reactions catalyzed by purified L-glutamine: Keto-scyllo-inositol aminotransferase, an enzyme required for biosynthesis of aminocyclitol antibiotics. *Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.* **33**, 452–459.

Mahmud, T., Flatt, P. M., and Wu, X. (2007). Biosynthesis of unusual aminocyclitol-containing natural products. *J. Nat. Prod.* **70**, 1384–1391.

Mansouri, K., and Piepersberg, W. (1991). Genetics of streptomycin production in *Streptomyces griseus*: Nucleotide sequence of five genes, *strFGHLK*, including a phosphatase gene. *Mol. Gen. Genet.* **228**, 459–469.

Mehta, R., and Champney, W. S. (2002). 30S ribosomal subunit assembly is a target for inhibition by aminoglycosides in *Escherichia coli*. *Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.* **46**, 1546–1549.

Nakamura, A., Haga, K., and Yamane, K. (1993). Three histidine residues in the active center of cyclodextrin glucanotransferase from alkalophilic *Bacillus* sp. 1011: Effects of the replacement on pH dependence and transition-state stabilization. *Biochemistry* **32**, 6624–6631.

Newton, G. L., Ta, P., Bzymek, K. P., and Fahey, R. C. (2006). Biochemistry of the initial steps of mycothiol biosynthesis. *J. Biol. Chem.* **281**, 33910–33920.

Odakura, Y., Kase, H., Itoh, S., Sath, S., Takasawa, S., Takahashi, K., Shirahata, K., and Nakayama, K. (1984). Biosynthesis of astromycin and related antibiotics. II. Biosynthetic studies with blocked mutants of *Micromonospora olivasterospora*. *J. Antibiot.* **37**, 1670–1680.

Ohnuki, T., Imanaka, T., and Aiba, S. (1985). Self-cloning in *Streptomyces griseus* of an *str* gene cluster for streptomycin biosynthesis and streptomycin resistance. *J. Bacteriol.* **164**, 85–94.

Ortmann, R., Matern, U., Grisebach, H., Stadler, P., Sinnwell, V., and Paulsen, H. (1974). NADPH-dependent formation of thymidine diphosphohydrostreptose from thymidine diphospho-D-glucose in a cell-free system from *Streptomyces griseus* and its correlation with streptomycin biosynthesis. *Eur. J. Biochem.* **43**, 265–271.

Piepersberg, W. (2001). Endogenous antimicrobial molecules: An ecological perspective. *In “Molecular Medical Microbiology.”* (M. Sussman, ed.), pp. 561–583. Academic Press, London.

Piepersberg, W., Aboshanab, K., Schmidt-Beissner, H., and Wehmeier, U. F. (2007). The biochemistry and genetics of aminoglycoside producers. *In “Aminoglycoside Antibiotics: From Chemical Biology to Drug Discovery.”* (D. P. Arya, ed.), pp. 15–118. Wiley-Interscience, Hoboken, NJ.

Piepersberg, W., and Wehmeier, U. F. (2009). Aminoglycosides. Bioactive bacterial metabolites. *In “Encyclopedia of microbiology.”* 3rd edition, chapter 38 (Schaechter, ed.), Elsevier, Oxford (UK), in press.

Pissowatzki, K., Mansouri, K., and Piepersberg, W. (1991). Genetics of streptomycin production in *Streptomyces griseus*: Molecular structure and putative function of genes strELMB2N. *Mol. Gen. Genet.* **231**, 113–123.

Reeves, P. (1993). Evolution of *Salmonella O* antigen variation by interspecific gene transfer on a large scale. *Trends Genet.* **9**, 17–22.

Rockser, Y., and Wehmeier, U. F. (2008). The *gac*-gene cluster for the production of acarbose from *Streptomyces glaucescens GLA*. O identification, isolation and characterization. *J. Biotechnol.* Epub ahead of print; PMID: 19059289.

Schägger, H., and von Jagow, G. (1987). Tricine-sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamid gel electrophoresis for the separation of proteins in the range from 1 to 100 kDa. *Anal. Biochem.* **166**, 368–379.

Schatz, A., Bugie, E., and Waksman, S. (1944). Streptomycin: A substance exhibiting antibiotic activity against gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. *Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med.* **55**, 66–69.

Schlösser, A., Kampers, T., and Schrempf, H. (1997). The *Streptomyces* ATP-binding component MsiK assists in cellobiose and maltose transport. *J. Bacteriol.* **179**, 2092–2095.

Schluenzen, F., Takemoto, C., Wilson, D. N., Kaminishi, T., Harms, J. M., Hanawa-Suetsugu, K., Szaflarski, W., Kawazoe, M., Shirouzu, M., Nierhaus, K. H., Yokoyama, S., and Fucini, P. (2006). The antibiotic kasugamycin mimics mRNA nucleotides to destabilize tRNA binding and inhibit canonical translation initiation. *Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol* **13**, 871–878.

Singh, D., Seo, M. J., Kwon, H. J., Rajkarnikar, A., Kim, K. R., Kim, S. O., and Suh, J. W. (2006). Genetic localization and heterologous expression of validamycin biosynthetic gene cluster isolated from *Streptomyces hygroscopicus* var. *limoneus* KCCM 11405 (IFO 12704). *Gene* **376**, 13–23.

Sogaard, M., Kadziola, A., Haser, R., and Svensson, B. (1993). Site-directed mutagenesis of histidine 93, aspartic acid 180, glutamic acid 205, Histidine 290, and aspartic acid 291 at the active site and tryptophan 279 at the raw starch binding site in barley alpha-amylase 1. *J. Biol. Chem.* **268**, 22480–22484.

Stratmann, A., Mahmud, T., Lee, S., Distler, J., Floss, H. G., and Piepersberg, W. (1999). The AcbC protein from *Actinoplanes sp.* SE50/110 is a C<sub>7</sub>-cyclitol synthase related to 3-dehydroquinate synthases and is involved in the biosynthesis of the α-glucosidase inhibitor acarbose. *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 10889–10896.

Studier, W. F., Rosenberg, A. H., Dunn, J. J., and Dubendorff, J. W. (1990). Use of the T7 RNA polymerase to direct expression of cloned genes. *Methods Enzymol.* **185**, 61–89.

Tabor, S., and Richardson, C. C. (1985). A bacteriophage T7 polymerase/promoter system for controlled exclusive expression of specific genes. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **82**, 1074–1078.

Takano, E., White, J., Thompson, C. J., and Bibb, M. J. (1995). Construction of thiostrepton-inducible, high-copy-number expression vectors for use in *Streptomyces* spp. *Gene* **166**, 133–137.

Thomas, M. G., Chan, Y. A., and Ozanick, S. G. (2003). Deciphering tuberactinomycin biosynthesis: Isolation, sequencing, and annotation of the viomycin biosynthetic gene cluster. *Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.* **47**, 2823–2830.

Uitdehaag, J. C. M., Mosi, R., Kalk, K. H., van der Veen, B. A., Dijkhuizen, L., Withers, S. G., and Dijkstra, B. W. (1999). X-ray structures along the reaction pathway of cyclodextrin glycosyltransferase elucidate catalysis in the alpha-amylase family. *Nat. Struct. Biol.* **6**, 432–436.

Volff, J. N., Eichenseer, C., Viell, P., Piendl, W., and Altenbuchner, J. (1996). Nucleotide sequence and role in DNA amplification of the direct repeats composing the amplifiable element AUD1 of *Streptomyces lividans* 66. *Mol. Microbiol.* **21**, 1037–1047.

Wahl, H. P., and Grisebach, H. (1979). Biosynthesis of streptomycin. dTDP-dihydrostrep- tose synthase from *Streptomyces griseus* and dTDP-4-keto-L-rhamnose 3,5-epimerase from *S*. *griseus* and *Escherichia coli* Y10. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta.* **568**, 243–252.

Walker, J. B. (1975a). Pathways of biosynthesis of the guanidinated inositol moieties of streptomycin and bluensomycin. *Methods Enzymol.* **43**, 429–433.

Walker, J. B. (1975b). L-glutamine:keto-scylllo-inositol aminotransferase. *Methods Enzymol.* **43**, 439–443.

Walker, J. B. (1975c). L-alanine-1D-1-guanidino-1-deoxy-3-keto-scylllo-inositol amino- transferase. *Methods Enzymol.* **43**, 462–465.

Walker, J. B. (1975d). L-arginine:inosamine-P amidinotransferase(s). *Methods Enzymol.* **43**, 451–458.

Wehmeier, U. F. (2003). The biosynthesis and metabolism of acarbose in *Actinoplanes SE50/ 110*: A progress report. *Biocat. Biotrans.* **21**, 279–285.

Wehmeier, U. F., and Piepersberg, W. (2004). Biotechnology and molecular biology of the alpha-glucosidase inhibitor acarbose. *Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.* **63**, 613–625.

Wu, X., Flatt, P. M., Schlörke, O., Zeeck, A., Dairi, T., and Mahmud, T. (2007). A comparative analysis of the sugar phosphate cyclase superfamily involved in primary and secondary metabolism. *ChemBioChem* **8**, 239–248.

Yokoyama, K., Kudo, F., Kuwahara, M., Inomata, K., Tamegai, H., Eguchi, T., and Kakinuma, K. (2005). Stereochemical recognition of doubly functional aminotransferase in 2-deoxystreptamine biosynthesis. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* **127**, 5869–5874.

Yokoyama, K., Yamamoto, Y., Kudo, F., and Eguchi, T. (2008). Involvement of two distinct N-acetylglucosaminyltransferases and a dual-function deacetylase in neomycin biosynthesis. *ChemBioChem* **9**, 865–869.
