
Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology 21 (2010) 500–511

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/semcdb

Review

Protein quality control in the ER: The recognition of misfolded proteins

Pekka Määtänen<sup>a</sup>, Kalle Gehring<sup>b</sup>, John J.M. Bergeron<sup>b</sup>, David Y. Thomas<sup>a,*</sup>

<sup>a</sup> Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3G 1Y6, Canada  
<sup>b</sup> Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 2B2, Canada  

ARTICLE INFO

Article history:
Available online 25 March 2010

We dedicate this paper to the memory of our colleague and teacher, the late Professor Annette Herscovics FRSC (1938–2008), who contributed so much to our understanding of N-glycosylation and pioneered the field of glycobiology.

Keywords:
ERQC  
N-glycosylation  
Folding  
Calnexin  
PDI  

ABSTRACT

The mechanism, in molecular terms of protein quality control, specifically of how the cell recognizes and discriminates misfolded proteins, remains a challenge. In the secretory pathway the folding status of glycoproteins passing through the endoplasmic reticulum is marked by the composition of the N-glycan. The different glycoforms are recognized by specialized lectins. The folding sensor UGGT acts as an unusual molecular chaperone and covalently modifies the Man9 N-glycan of a misfolded protein by adding a glucose moiety and converts it to Glc1Man9 that rebinds the lectin calnexin. However, further links between the folding status of a glycoprotein and the composition of the N-glycan are unclear. There is little unequivocal evidence for other proteins in the ER recognizing the N-glycan and also acting as molecular chaperones. Nevertheless, based upon a few examples, we suggest that this function is carried out by individual proteins in several different complexes. Thus, calnexin binds the protein disulfide isomerase ERp57, that acts upon Glc1Man9 glycoproteins. In another example the protein disulfide isomerase ERdj5 binds specifically to EDEM (which is probably a mannosidase) and a lectin OS9, and reduces the disulfide bonds of bound glycoproteins destined for ERAD. Thus the glycan recognition is performed by a lectin and the chaperone function performed by a specific partner protein that can recognize misfolded proteins. We predict that this will be a common arrangement of proteins in the ER and that members of protein foldase families such as PDI and PPI will bind specifically to lectins in the ER. Molecular chaperones BiP and GRp94 will assist in the folding of proteins bound in these complexes as well as in the folding of non-glycoproteins.

© 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Contents

1. Introduction ..... 501
2. ER lectins, chaperones and foldases ..... 501
   2.1. ER lectins ..... 501
   2.2. UGGT ..... 502
   2.3. ER sugar processing ..... 503
   2.4. Cargo sorting ..... 504
   2.5. BiP ..... 504
   2.6. PDI ..... 505
   2.7. PPI ..... 507
   2.8. Recognition of misfolded proteins by UPR components ..... 507
3. Protein interactions in the ER ..... 508
   3.1. Redundancy and targeting to functional modules ..... 508
   3.2. Regulation of interactions ..... 508
4. Mechanisms of recognition of misfolded proteins ..... 508
5. Conclusions ..... 509
Acknowledgements ..... 509
References ..... 509

Abbreviations: ER, endoplasmic reticulum; EDEM, ER-degradation enhancing mannosidase-like protein; PDI, protein disulfide isomerase; PPI, peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase; RNaseB, ribonuclease B; UGGT, UDP-glucose:glycoprotein-glucosyltransferase; ERAD, ER-associated degradation; ERAF, ER-associated folding.

* Corresponding author at: McGill University Department of Biochemistry, 1033 Pine Avenue West, Irving Ludmer Building, Room 326, Montreal, QC H3A 1A1, Canada. Tel.: +1 514 398 2873; fax: +1 514 398 4866. E-mail address: david.thomas@mcgill.ca (D.Y. Thomas).

1084-9521/$ – see front matter © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.semcdb.2010.03.006

P. Määtänen et al. / Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology 21 (2010) 500–511

1. Introduction

Although ER quality control of proteins is a topic of relatively recent interest, quality control in biological processes has long been a subject of intensive study. DNA repair is an example of one such process where the fidelity of cell division is maintained by the action of DNA polymerase and then by repair enzymes that recognize incorrectly paired nucleotides. The fidelity of protein synthesis is maintained by a number of control processes that act at various steps during peptide synthesis. At the cellular and organismal levels there are mechanisms to remove organelles by autophagy and to remove cells by apoptosis. These and other mechanisms serve to maintain the fidelity and integrity of cells and organisms. A central question in all quality control processes is how are the incorrect components recognized and discriminated from the correct components? Often the energy differences between correct and incorrect components are very small and although many of the components are known, the mechanisms of discrimination and selection of secretory proteins are still obscure.

In this review we address the question of how misfolded proteins are recognized in the ER and selected for vesicular export or for ER-associated degradation (ERAD). Elsewhere in this volume there are some excellent reviews of the calnexin cycle, ERAD and the unfolded protein response. Indeed in the general literature there are many recent reviews of this field. Thus we restrict ourselves here to ER components that recognize and discriminate misfolded and folded proteins. We also speculate on some of the mechanisms that are responsible for recognizing unfolded and misfolded proteins and ensuring their fates.

there are tissue specific proteins such as calmegin [5] and PDILT [6].

We probably now have a complete, or nearly complete, list of the lectins, N-glycan processing enzymes, protein disulfide isomerases, prolyl cis-trans isomerases, and the molecular chaperones in the ER. A brief list of some of the key players is given in Table 1. The detailed study of the functions of these proteins is continuing and giving some surprises.

2.1. ER lectins

The early ideas of an N-glycan code of different glycans, that measures the progress and guides glycoproteins through the initial stages of the secretory pathway by the action of glucosidases and mannosidases and the recognition of the modified N-glycans by specific lectins, seems perhaps with some gaps, to be largely correct. The involvement of specific lectins such as ERGIC-53 in the intermediate compartment [7,8] (Fig. 1) and the mannose-6-phosphate receptor in the Golgi, in the sorting of glycoproteins are well established.

There are a number of lectins within the ER that show a remarkable range of glycan specificities. The canonical ER lectin is the type 1 membrane protein calnexin and the closely related ER luminal protein calreticulin. Both have specificity for the Glc1Man9 N-glycan that can be generated by the action of glucosidase II on the Glc2Man9 glycan after processing of Glc3Man9 by glucosidase I, or by UGGT1 mediated addition of a glucose moiety.

Although calreticulin as a calcium-binding ER luminal protein had been known for sometime, experiments with calnexin established their role in the N-glycan pathway. The key experiments were a series of pulse-chase experiments using a C-terminal anti-calnexin antibody that showed calnexin interacted with nascent N-glycoproteins but not with non-glycoproteins such as serum albumen, in the ER [9]. Then in vitro experiments with purified calnexin and monoglucosylated RNaseB showed that calnexin is specific for Glc1Man9. Using a mixture of folded, misfolded and folding intermediates of RNaseB it was shown that the binding to calnexin in vitro is independent of protein conformation [10]. The latter result has only been shown for ribonuclease B and experiments have shown that calnexin and calreticulin may also recognize unfolded proteins [11]. The structure of calnexin has not completely resolved this question as there are a few flexible regions that were not resolved in the structure that might bind unfolded proteins [12]. However, despite extensive searches by us, no peptides have been found that bind to calnexin or calreticulin (unpub), unlike most other molecular chaperones.

The molecular chaperone role of calnexin and calreticulin in what has become known as the “calnexin cycle”, was established when it was shown that the protein disulfide isomerase ERP57 bound to calnexin and accelerated the folding of Glc1Man9 RNaseB

2. ER lectins, chaperones and foldases

Much of what we know about ER proteins and chaperones has come from dedicated studies of isolated proteins and ER enzymes and from genetic studies principally in yeast. There have been several attempts to define and catalogue all the proteins that are present in the ER. An informatics driven study to define the cellular locations of all proteins upon a number of criteria included the recognition of 333 proteins as localized in the ER [1]. This Bayesian prediction used InterPro motifs identified from DNA sequence data. InterPro is a database that uses protein domains, families, functional sites, and post-translational modifications [2] as well as signal peptides and the number of transmembrane domains in human proteins, to predict the subcellular localization of proteins [1,3]. Many of these predictions could be confirmed by a variety of experimental approaches the most comprehensive being a proteomics analysis of purified rat liver ER fractions in which many novel proteins were also found [4]. Thus probably most or all of the ER membrane and lumenal proteins have been identified although

Table 1  
Principal ER chaperones.

| Family                     | Main members                                      | Functions                          |
|----------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|
| HSP70                      | BiP/GRP78                                         | Chaperone                          |
| HSP90                      | Endoplasmin/GRP94                                 | Chaperone                          |
| HSP40                      | ERdj1-ERdj7                                       | Co-chaperones                      |
| Lectins                    | Calnexin, Calreticulin                            | Glycoprotein quality control       |
|                            | EDEMs 1, 2, 3                                     | Glycoprotein degradation           |
|                            | OS-9, XTPB-3                                      | Glycoprotein degradation           |
| Glycan processing enzymes  | UGGT                                              | Folding sensor                     |
|                            | ER glucosidases I, II                            | Trims off glucose from N-glycans   |
|                            | ER mannosidases                                   | Removes terminal mannoses          |
| Peptidyl-prolyl isomerases | Cyclophilin B, FKBP13, FKBP23, FKBP65             | Isomerize peptide bonds            |
| Ero1                       | Ero1α, Ero1β                                      | Oxidation for disulfide bonds      |
| Oxidoreductases            | PDI, ERP72, ERP57, plus many others               | Disulfide bond formation and isomerization |

P. Määtänen et al. / Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology 21 (2010) 500–511

Fig. 1. The endoplasmic reticulum quality control apparatus for protein folding. ER-associated folding (ERAF) begins when a nascent chain enters the ER through the translocon that associates with the microtubule tethering protein Climp63, the oligosaccharyltransferase complex (OGT), and Glucosidase I (Gluc I) [115]. Proteins without N-X-S/T consensus N-glycosylation sites early in their sequences associate first with the ER luminal hsp70 paralog BiP that aids their folding through cycles of binding and release facilitated by Erdj proteins that stimulate BiP ATPase activity. Protein disulfide isomerases (PDI), and peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerases (PPI) act directly on the folding protein to catalyze rate-limiting steps. Glc3Man9GlcNAc2 glycans are added en bloc to most secreted proteins, and are rapidly processed by glucosidase I and more slowly by glucosidase II to the Glc1 form that binds to calnexin or calreticulin. Calnexin and calreticulin recruit the disulfide isomerase ERp57 to promote disulfide bond formation until the terminal glucose moiety is trimmed by glucosidase II. The folded state of the protein is interrogated by UDP-glucose:glycoprotein-glucosyltransferase (UGGT) that adds a glucose moiety if the protein is incompletely folded, sending it back for more folding attempts. Futile recycling of terminally misfolded proteins is prevented by ER α-mannosidase I, and most likely also EDEM3 that successively cleave mannose moieties from the glycan, eventually removing the mannose that is normally reglucosylated by UGGT. Cycling of the protein to the Golgi and back (not shown) can expose it to Golgi Mannosidase I that performs a similar timing role. The high-mannose glycan serves as an address tag for anterograde trafficking to the Golgi via the membrane bound lectins VIP36, VIPL, and ERGIC-53 (VIP36). When extensively trimmed, the tag signals for ER-associated degradation (ERAD). In ERAD, lectins OS9 and XTP3-B target misfolded proteins to the SEL1-HRD1 E3 ubiquitin ligases associated with the retrotranslocon. While OS9 appears specific for glycoproteins, XTP3-B interacts with both glycosylated and non-glycosylated substrates. OS9 associates with GRp94/BiP and SEL1L in a mutually exclusive manner, where GRp94 and BiP presumably help sequester the misfolded protein away from other interactions until retrotranslocation. A supramolecular functional ERAD complex, comprising EDEM, ERdj5, and BiP, allows reduction of disulfides in terminally misfolded proteins, and subsequent retrotranslocation. ERFAD, a flavoprotein that interacts with SEL1L, OS9, and ERdj5 might provide reducing equivalents to ERdj5. ERdj5 concomitantly stimulates the ATPase activity of BiP, which is released from ERdj5 and converted to its ADP-bound form that tightly binds the substrate in a dislocation-competent state until it is retrotranslocated, ubiquitinated, and degraded by the proteasome. Accumulation of misfolded proteins in the ER triggers the unfolded protein response (UPR) that signals compensatory mechanisms to aid quality control, including upregulation of ER chaperones and down-regulation of protein translation [116].

[13]. A series of experiments that examined the rate of folding of Glc1Man9 RNaseB specifically labeled in the glucose moiety, in the presence of a large excess of RNaseB showed that the reaction was specific for the glycoprotein bound to calnexin [13]. Subsequent determination of the structure of calnexin and a combined genetic and structural study determined that ERp57 bound to the extended P-domain of calnexin/calreticulin [14,15], while the N-glycan binds to the globular beta-sheet domain [12]. The ERp57/calnexin interface was clearly defined when the partial X-ray structure of ERp57 was solved, and the binding site was mapped using NMR and mutagenesis [16]. The importance of the calnexin/ERp57 interaction for substrate recruitment to ERp57 in vivo was shown in subsequent experiments with a point mutant R282A that abrogates this interaction and also greatly diminishes the ability of ERp57 to form mixed disulfides with substrates in the ER [17]. A model of the ERp57/calnexin protein folding module is shown in Fig. 2.

The ERp57/calnexin pair is an excellent example of modularity where the specificity determinant is one component, calnexin, and the enzymatic function is carried out by a partner, ERp57. We speculate that similar specificity determining partnerships will be found for many of the less well-characterized chaperones and foldases in the ER.

An example of a new ER lectin is the recent discovery of a Glc2Man9 lectin, termed malectin, that recognizes the Glc2Man9

N-glycan. This is a potential new component in the ER quality control system but it is not obvious what role it plays [18]. In the case of the Glc1Man9 N-glycan that binds calnexin and calreticulin, folding is catalyzed by the disulfide isomerase ERp57. But it has yet to be determined if malectin is involved in a folding or quality control step.

### 2.2. UGGT

The best evidence for the recognition of unfolded glycoproteins by a protein in the calnexin cycle is for UDP-glucose:glycoprotein-glucosyltransferase (UGGT1). UGGT1 was detected as a unique activity that added a glucose moiety from UDP-glucose to unfolded proteins bearing high-mannose oligosaccharides in ER extracts [117]. This property together with the specificity of calnexin and calreticulin for Glc1Man9 oligosaccharides, suggested that UGGT could act on misfolded glycoproteins in the ER and reglucosylate them so that they can rebind these lectin-like chaperones and undergo further folding cycles. Thus UGGT is a molecular chaperone in that it recognizes unfolded proteins as substrates and uniquely makes a covalent modification, specifically the addition of a glucose moiety to the Man9 glycan. This Glc1Man9 glycoprotein can now rebind calnexin/calreticulin and undergo further folding cycles catalyzed by ERp57.

P. Määtänen et al. / Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology 21 (2010) 500–511

Fig. 2. The ERp57/calnexin protein folding module. The luminal domain of calnexin (blue) comprises a globular lectin domain that specifically binds Glc1 N-glycans with the region shown in red, and an extended proline rich arm domain whose tip interacts with the b′ domain of ERp57 (silver). A critical R282 residue that provides the specific binding site for the arm domain is shown in orange. ERp57 has the domain arrangement abb′a′, forming a U-shape where the a and a′ domains contain redox active catalytic Cys-x-x-Cys motifs (yellow). The interaction illustrated positions ERp57 in close proximity to glycoproteins bound to calnexin, constructing a functional module for oxidative folding of glycoproteins.

The activity and remarkable preference of UGGT1 for unfolded glycoproteins have been well-characterized in vitro. It was already known that UGGT1 recognizes the core pentasaccharide of the N-glycan [19]. Man9 N-glycosylated protein substrates suitable for studying UGGT activity are difficult to synthesize [20], but fortunately yeast genetics allows for their production as many of the components of ERQC are dispensable in the yeast S. cerevisiae. This enabled us to define the recognition preferences of UGGT1 [21]. The experiment was to digest Man9 glycoproteins from yeast with trypsin, glucosylate them with UGGT1 and UDP-glucose, and identify the glucosylated glycopeptides by mass spectrometry [21]. In this way the amino acid residues adjacent to the N-glycan asparagine that are preferred by UGGT1 were determined.

We were also able to use the yeast system to determine the minimal conformational perturbation that is efficiently recognized by UGGT1. While UGGT1 does not efficiently glucosylate wild-type β-glucanase with two Man9 N-glycans, an enzymatically active secreted β-glucanase with a single F280S point mutation converting a hydrophobic to a hydrophilic residue is an efficient substrate for UGGT1. This mutation was distant from the glycosylation sites, and did not increase the sensitivity of the protein to protease, indicating that the protein is in a near-native state [22]. These data show that UGGT1 can modify N-linked glycans positioned at least 40 Å from localized regions of disorder and sense subtle conformational changes within structurally compact, enzymatically active but mutant glycoprotein substrates. Since UGGT1 is a large 180 kDa protein probably existing as a homodimer in the ER, with the catalytic residues near the C-terminus, this result is consistent with a large N-terminal region that can recognize

and accommodate a variety of misfolded glycoprotein substrates. In other studies the removal of a native disulfide bond creates a substrate for UGGT1 [23]. Further in vitro studies showed that UGGT1 has a preference for molten globule near-native proteins and can reglucosylate natively folded proteins that have impaired oligomerization [20,24]. The structure of UGGT1 would be very useful, but so far this has eluded several investigators. In vivo studies to support this role for UGGT1 in maintaining the calnexin cycle have proved to be challenging as Glc1Man9 glycans can be created both by the action of glucosidase II as well as by reglucosylation of Man9 N-glycoproteins. In vivo UGGT1 mediated reglucosylation of endogenous transferrin is protective against disulfide-bonded aggregates and heat-induced misfolding [25,26].

There is another UGGT, UGGT2 with no known enzymatic activity and lacking some of the active site residues, but with high sequence conservation in the rest of the molecule [27]. Thus UGGT2 may be able to recognize misfolded proteins and have a function through association with other ER foldases. UGGT2 is an essential gene as is the S. cerevisiae homolog KRE5.

### 2.3. ER sugar processing

The slow catalytic activity of the ER-mannosidase (Mns1) [28] led to the “mannose timer” hypothesis that posited that it was responsible for removal of glycoproteins from the calnexin cycle that could not be productively folded, as measured by their prolonged association with calnexin. A search for a lectin that binds N-glycoproteins that are exiting the calnexin cycle after removal of a mannose residue to create a Man8 N-glycan was made in

the yeast genome sequence using the catalytic domain of yeast MNS1 gene as a probe. This identified a non-essential gene HTM1 (now MNS1) that when deleted blocked the ERAD of a number of ER-retained mutant membrane proteins [29]. Similar proteins were also found in mammalian cells where 3 related EDEM proteins were identified that also are important in ERAD [30]. While it was seen that the HTM1/MNS1 gene conserved the active site cysteine of the ER-mannosidase MNS1, no enzymatic activity could be found in the isolated protein. However, recent *in vivo* studies in yeast showed conclusively that Htm1p/Mnl1p has enzymatic activity [31,32]. Similarly for the EDEMs, *in vivo* experiments implicate them as enzymes in mannose processing [33,34], although this has yet to be confirmed *in vitro*.

EDEM binds directly to the protein disulfide isomerase ERdj5 and is found in a complex with BiP [35] that will be described in more detail below.

The formation of the Man7 N-glycan is a key step in directing glycoprotein substrates for ERAD as the product of Htm1/EDEM action is a Man7 N-glycan with a terminal α1,6-linked mannose [36]. This is recognized by the lectin Yos9 (in yeast) that was identified in a genome wide screen for ERAD genes [37]. Yos9 has two mammalian homologs OS9 and the related XTP3-B that both contain mannose-6-phosphate receptor homology (MRH) domains [38]. These proteins are themselves found in a complex with the ubiquitin protein ligase Hrd1, the Hrd3/SEL1L protein that has a large ER luminal domain, and with the ER HSP90 homolog GRP94 (Fig. 1). Intriguingly the integrity of the complex is essential for ERAD although the exact role of GRP94, as an active partner or a structural component of the complex, remains to be elucidated.

### 2.4. Cargo sorting

One gap in our knowledge is the identification of proteins that might act in the sorting of cargo proteins into COPII vesicles. Considerable work has been done on the membrane bound cargo recruiting lectins ERGIC53, VIP36, and VIPL that reside in the ER to Golgi intermediate compartment, and recent work has clarified their glycan specificities (primarily Man8 and Man9) and suggests that they release cargo in the Golgi and cycle back to the ER in a process dependent on slightly higher pH in the Golgi [8]. An ER multitopic membrane protein Erv29 has been found in yeast to be required for packaging of soluble proteins into COPII vesicles although the recognition requirements are not known [39]. Cargo sorting impinges on post-ER quality control and lysosomal degradation that is being recognized as an increasingly important mechanism for substrates including prion protein [40], and a recently identified obligate substrate of Golgi quality control in yeast, Wsc1p [41].

Additional candidate proteins have been proposed for cargo sorting. One such candidate is the p24 family of type I ER membrane proteins that is highly conserved in eukaryotes [42]. They are abundant constituents of the ER and COPII vesicles and their C-termini bind to COPII coat proteins (Sec23). They are also found in COPI vesicles involved in retrograde Golgi to ER transport. Curiously although conservation of the members of the p24 family is found from yeast to humans, a knock out strain of all 8 members of the p24 family in yeast is viable [43,44].

The p24s contain a GOLD domain that is involved in protein–protein interactions with other proteins, and often they are found associated with proteins that have carbohydrate binding domains [45]. However, experiments to show interactions with cargo proteins, or with any ER proteins, have proved inconclusive [46]. Whether this due to a low affinity of p24 for cargo proteins or they are just not involved in cargo selection remains to be determined. One intriguing result was the discovery that the p24 family member TMP21 is a subunit of the presenilin com-

plex and modulates gamma-secretase activity [47]. Perhaps the p24 family provides an ER luminal surface that does not interact with cargo proteins and prevents them from encountering the lipid of the vesicle? New ideas and testable hypotheses are needed.

### 2.5. BiP

BiP is the most abundant ER chaperone, and serves multiple roles in the ER, but here we focus on its binding to substrate proteins and how it might be partitioned between ER-associated folding (ERAF) and ER-associated degradation (ERAD). BiP is similar to cytosolic hsp70 in that it contains an N-terminal ATPase domain, and a C-terminal peptide binding domain. When BiP is bound to ATP, it is in its open conformation, and ATP hydrolysis to ADP causes BiP to close to its tighter affinity substrate binding conformation. The hydrolysis of ATP by BiP is stimulated by ER resident J-domain co-chaperones, of which there are seven (ERdj1–7) [48]. The ADP-bound closed state of BiP is re-opened by exchange of ADP for ATP that is enhanced by the nucleotide exchange factors GRP170 and Sil1.

BiP is usually the first chaperone to bind the nascent chain, and prefers to bind surfaces with alternating aromatic and hydrophobic amino acids [49]. Binding of BiP to nascent chains is regulated by ERdj1 and 2, homologs of yeast Sec63. The stretches bound by BiP are predicted to exist quite frequently in protein sequences (about every 36 amino acids) [50] allowing BiP to act as a molecular ratchet to facilitate translocation of the nascent chain into the ER lumen [51]. The actual *in vivo* specificity of BiP is less clear, as it likely engages in multiple transient weak affinity interactions with substrates that enter the lumen. The broad specificity of BiP for protein binding is analogous to the broad specificity of PDI for protein or peptide substrates through a large hydrophobic region in its b′ domain (described in more detail in Section 2.6).

The ERdj co-chaperones of BiP direct its activity to specific substrates, although the specificity determinants of each J-domain co-chaperone is not yet known. ERdj3, ERdj4, ERdj5 and ERdj6 (p58IPK) are induced by the UPR, hinting that these proteins are important for protein folding and quality control [48]. Indeed, ERdj3 is a component of a multi-protein complex that binds to immunoglobulin G during its folding in the ER [52] and is only found in this complex when substrate is also present. ERdj3 binds preferentially to the ATP bound form of BiP, and can bind directly to unfolded protein substrates *in vitro* [53] and *in vivo* [54] indicating that it recruits substrates to BiP. However, release of ERdj3 from these substrates requires interaction between the J-domain and BiP, hinting that BiP catalyzes this release when it changes from its ATP bound form to the ADP-bound form that binds tightly to substrates. In rat liver microsomes, ERdj3 can be isolated in complex with BiP when loaded with ATP, confirming that ERdj3 interaction with BiP is favored in the ATP bound state (our unpublished observations). Conversely, interaction of BiP with GRp170 is favored under ATP depleted conditions, consistent with its role as a nucleotide exchange factor [55].

Membrane anchored ERdj4 can bind directly to mutant surfactant protein C (SP-C) in a manner independent of BiP, while ERdj5 requires an intact J-domain to interact with SP-C [56]. These results support the model that ERdj4, like ERdj3, binds directly to misfolded protein substrates, acting as a chaperone that recruits BiP. A glycine–phenylalanine rich region of ERdj4 (similar to those in other Type I and II cytosolic DnaJ proteins) was proposed to be responsible for its chaperone-like activity, but this suggestion requires experimental verification. ERdj6/p58IPK has also been shown to bind directly to protein substrates [57].

Direct substrate binding by several ERdjs places them in a position to discriminate folded and unfolded proteins that could be
considered analogous to UGGT in the calnexin cycle. Rather than promoting rebinding to calnexin for more folding cycles, J-domain proteins stimulate ATP hydrolysis of BiP to promote its binding activity. We speculate that in analogy to the way EDEM, UGGT, and ERGIC53 differ in their recognition of glycan types/folded states, the different ERdjs have different substrate preferences or different specialized functions to direct BiP. As such, the decisions for BiP function in ERAF vs. ERAD may lie with the BiP co-chaperones, with the energy required to promote folding or unfolding coming from ATP.

The ERdj5–BiP–EDEM triad functions in ERAD of several substrates including the null Hong Kong variant of human α1-antitrypsin and the j chain of mouse immunoglobulin M [35]. It will be of interest to determine whether ERdj5 is involved in the identification of terminally misfolded substrates, or if this is carried out by EDEM and BiP. It appears that EDEM provides the targeting signal, because kifunensine that inhibits ER α-mannosidase I (see Fig. 1) completely blocks the more rapid degradation of these proteins when ERdj5 is transiently overexpressed [35]. The distinction between ERAF and ERAD specific ERdjs is not completely clear, but knockdown and overexpression studies indicate that ERdj3 and 6 are primarily involved in ERAF (reviewed in Ref. [48]) while ERdj4 and ERdj5 have greater influence on ERAD [35,56]. Thus, it was proposed that the switch from ERdj3/6 (folding) to ERdj4/5 (degradation) might be important for decisions that determine if a protein will proceed to secretion or be degraded [48].

While BiP associates with nascent chains immediately and transiently upon synthesis [58], its association with misfolded mutant proteins is prolonged [59]. This prolonged association might be a signal for degradation of the substrate protein, and evidence suggests that prolonged association to BiP of several misfolded substrates including ΔF508-CFTR [60] and mutant SP-C leads to degradation [56].

BiP is found in a multi-protein complex that includes several protein disulfide isomerases and peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerases [52]. The association of chaperones with foldases in multi-member complexes was proposed to direct foldase activities to the nascent polypeptide chain [61]. This is an appealing model that could help account for the rapid folding rates observed in vivo. For example, BiP and PDI cooperate to fold antibodies in vitro [62]. Here, BiP binds the unfolded polypeptide chain, allowing PDI access to cysteines that would be otherwise buried. More recently, a critical role for the peptidyl-prolyl cis–trans isomerase cyclophilin B in antibody folding has been uncovered [63], where isomerization of a critical proline in the CH1 domain is a rate determining step for CH1-CL heterodimerization. Despite these many advances in understanding the cooperation of BiP with several other ER chaperones and foldases, the lack of detailed insight into how these complexes assemble has made it difficult to understand their mechanisms of action.

Aside from partnerships that target BiP to specific sites of folding or ERAD, BiP is further regulated by post-translational modifications. Recently, acetylation of BiP on lysine 585 was found to occur in several cancer cell lines in response to the HDAC inhibitor vorinostat [64]. BiP acetylation inhibits its association with PERK leading to UPR induction. The rapid promotion of ΔF508-CFTR trafficking seen with HDAC inhibitors [65] suggests that this modification could be a key regulator of ER chaperone functions, but further work is needed to clarify these recent observations. BiP is also ADP-ribosylated in response to glucose or amino acid starvation [66]. This modification was proposed to inhibit its activity because BiP expressed in response to the same stress was not modified, and under basal conditions BiP remains unmodified and active. The post-translational modifications of BiP could provide a means to rapidly regulate this abundant ER chaperone, and should be addressed in future work.

Fig. 3. The large hydrophobic peptide binding pocket in the b′ domain of human protein disulfide isomerase. The surface provides specificity to bind exposed hydrophobic patches or unfolded peptides but does not appear to discriminate sequence, instead relying on multiple redundant interactions. Hydrophobic residues that line the pocket are displayed in stick representation and numbered from the initiator methionine of the signal sequence. The b′ domain shown is a portion of PDB 2K18 from the bb′ solution structure solved by NMR [72].

### 2.6. PDI

Protein disulfide isomerase is the primary oxidant of cysteine thiols in the endoplasmic reticulum, and one of the most abundant ER proteins. It can make (oxidize), break (reduce), and re-arrange (isomerize) disulfide bonds. It acquires oxidizing equivalents from the luminal flavoprotein Ero1α, reviewed in [67]. Its function is critical for balancing protein load with capacity, as disruption of disulfide bonding with a reducing agent such as DTT leads to rapid induction of the unfolded protein response [68]. The expression of PDI is rapidly induced under different ER stresses [69], indicating a crucial role for PDI in protein folding quality control that extends beyond disulfide bonding. This is not surprising because PDI exhibits chaperone activity both in vitro [70], and in vivo [71], and we have recently mapped its unfolded protein binding site by NMR (Fig. 3) [72]. Recent work has also highlighted the role of PDI in ERAD [73,74].

PDI is one of a family of 20 related proteins in the mammalian ER to date, with sequences and domain architectures that vary widely [75] (Fig. 4). Family membership criteria are: ER localization (signal sequence and KDEL or similar ER retention motif), and the presence of at least one domain with a predicted thioredoxin-like structure as seen in PDI. PDI itself has 4 thioredoxin-like domains, designated a, b, b′, and a′. The a and a′ domains contain CGHC active site motifs that are reactive with cysteines of substrate proteins. Most PDI family members contain a combination of inactive and active thioredoxin-like domains. However, ERp29 and ERp27 only contain inactive domains (Fig. 4) and ERp27 binds peptides and has chaperone activity in vitro [76], while ERp29 was recently shown to chaperone assembly of the gap junction protein connexin43 [77]. Conversely, ERp19, AGR-2, and hAG-3 each contain a single active thioredoxin-like domain, without any adjoining inactive thioredoxin-like domains. The necessity for so many PDI family
| Act |  |
| --- | --- |
| O, R, I, C | PDI CGHC -KDEL |
| O, R, (I?), C | PDip CGHC CTHC -KEEL |
| C | PDILT SKQS SKKC -KEEL |
| O, R, I | ERp57 CGHC -QEDL |
| O, R, I | ERp72 CGHC CGHC -KEEL |
| O, I, C | ERp44 CRFS -RDEL |
| O, R, I, C | PDIr CSMC CGHC CPHC -KEEL |
| ? | ERp46 CGHC CGHC CGHC -KDEL |
| O, I, C | P5 CGHC CGHC -KDEL |
| R, C | ERdj5 CSHC CPPC CHPC CGPC -KDEL |
| O | ERp19 CGAC -EDEL |
| Mucin shuttle | AGR-2 CPHS -KTEL |
| O | hAG-3 CQYS -KDEL |
| R, I | TMX CPAC -TDKS |
| ? | TMX2 SNDC -KKDK |
| O | TMX3 CGHC -KKKD |
| ? | TMX4 CPSC -DKGL |
| ? | TMX5 CRFS -EHVE |
| C | ERp27 -KVEL |
| C | ERp29 -KEEL |

Fig. 4. The human protein disulfide isomerases. Thioredoxin-like fold domains are showed by rectangles. Catalytic domains are colored in red (a) and light red (a'), while noncatalytic domains are in blue (b), and light blue (b'). Yellow denotes a conserved, structured x-linker between b' and a' domains. Wavy lined boxes represent acidic extensions, and a speckled box denotes the basic tail of ERp57. The DnaJ domain of ERdj5 is represented by a green box. White boxes denote transmembrane domains. For activities, O = oxidase, R = reductase, I = isomerase, and C = chaperone.

members remains an open question, but several of the most abundant PDIs have distinct substrate specificities [78], suggesting that they may be specialized for different substrates or substrate classes. For example, the single domain PDI AGR-2 acts as a mucin shuttle and is highly expressed in intestinal goblet cells [79]. The different known activities for each PDI, including misfolded protein binding (chaperone activity) are shown in Fig. 4.

The question of how PDI binds newly synthesized or misfolded proteins to make, break, or re-arrange their disulfide bonds has finally been answered. Cross-linking studies with radiolabelled peptides and mutants of PDI implicated its inactive b' domain in peptide binding [80], but the lack of structural insight into this binding site prevented further characterization of its properties. Recent resolution of the bb' structure of PDI in solution by NMR allowed for detailed mapping of the binding site within the b' domain [72] that also matched a putative binding site identified from the X-ray crystal structure of the b'x fragment [81]. NMR titrations with model peptides and unfolded RNaseA perturbed a large hydrophobic region of the b' domain, with strong shifts along helices α1' and α3' and all 5 beta strands of this domain. The large hydrophobic pocket identified is depicted in Fig. 3, with hydrophobic residues that line the pocket labeled. Importantly, the site binds unfolded RNaseA but not folded RNaseA, and the ability of full-length PDI to refold RNaseA in vitro can be inhibited by peptides at concentrations equivalent to their affinity for the b' domain [72]. These results indicated that the site identified is the primary substrate binding site of PDI. Subsequent studies have confirmed the binding site identified [82].

The binding site identified does not appear to exhibit stringent specificity for peptide sequences, and binds with relatively weak affinity to peptides and unfolded RNaseA (~30–120 μM) [72]. This suggests that the binding reaction involves multiple redundant interactions, and could facilitate substrates of varied sequences, as might be expected for PDI. The lack of specificity also speaks to a mechanism whereby a bound unfolded substrate protein could be released once it acquires its native state. This could also prevent PDI from frequently engaging correctly folded substrates.

Sequence comparisons of the b′ substrate binding site of PDI with analogous regions of other PDI family members allows us to predict that PDIP, PDILT, ERp27, and ERp44 probably bind unfolded protein similarly to PDI. Indeed, each of these proteins has been shown to function as a chaperone (Fig. 4).

How do the other remaining PDIs interact with substrates? They may contain substrate binding sites too different in sequence to recognize, but more likely, they associate with other ER proteins that can recruit substrates to them. This is exemplified by ERp57 and calnexin (Fig. 2), ERdj5–EDEM–BiP, and seems to also be the case for P5 and BiP [78].

One way that the ER folding machinery could ensure quality control of protein oxidation in the ER arises from the above observations taking into account the standard reduction potentials of PDIs. While ERp57 has a standard reduction potential (E°′) of −167 and −156 mV for it is a and a′ domains, respectively [83]. The standard reduction potential of PDI is lower at near −180 mV [84], making PDI more likely to reduce protein substrates under similar conditions. Specific targeting of the slightly more oxidizing ERp57 to nascent chains that relies on intact Glc1 high-mannose N-glycans bound to calnexin or calreticulin, could provide a way to partition it away from substrate proteins that have been earmarked for degradation by mannose trimming. PDI on the other hand, known to be at an equilibrium between both oxidized and reduced states *in vivo* [85] and also in position to act as an efficient oxidase [86], binds substrates directly, and would be well suited to work in both oxidation of nascent chains, and reduction of terminally misfolded proteins for ERAD [74]. Furthermore, ERdj5 is targeted to an ERAD complex with EDEM and BiP and has an even lower standard reduction potential, of −219 mV, consistent with its specialized role in reduction of terminally misfolded proteins for retrotranslocation and degradation. The discovery of a novel flavoprotein ERFAD that associates with ERdj5 and OS9 [87] further supports a partitioning between ERAF and ERAD components (Fig. 1). Thus, the targeting of PDIs to specific ER quality control functions appears to be related to their reduction potentials, a trend that might offer further explanation for the multiplicity of these protein folding catalysts.

### 2.7. PPI

Peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerases (PPIs), also called rotamases, catalyze the slow isomerization of Xaa-proline peptide bonds that are found in both cis and trans in folded proteins. Proline isomerization has been identified as a rate-limiting step in the folding of several model proteins including antibodies [88,63] and ribonuclease A [89]. Correction of Xaa-proline bond orientation happens when a protein has reached an almost completely folded conformation [90,91], illustrating that substantial protein folding events have occurred prior to this step for those proteins studied. In the case of the immunoglobulin G CH1 and CL domains, the CH1 domain is intrinsically disordered until it dimerizes with the CL domain, an event that is preceded by isomerization of proline 32 in the CH1 domain [63]. One ER resident PPI, cyclophilin B, found in multi-protein complexes that associate with IgG *in vivo*, was shown to moderately enhance the rate of this isomerization step *in vitro*, leading to the correctly folded dimeric species [63].

Because proline isomerization is not a directional process, it could be important for both ERAF and ERAD. Drastic effects on protein folding in cells as a result of knockdown of PPIs have not been reported. This could be because unlike disulfide isomerization, proline isomerization affects stages of folding that are generally far more rapid than formation of disulfide bonds. Such subtle effects, though likely important for rapid rates of folding *in vivo*, may be difficult to observe in pulse-chase assays. The *in vitro* enhancement of refolding reduced and denatured ribonuclease A that contains two cis prolines by cyclophilin B is hardly detectable (our unpublished observations). Effects on ERAD may be similarly difficult to measure, but might be related to “loosening up” proteins locked into stabilized terminally misfolded conformations prior to retrotranslocation.

Early studies on the sequence specificity of cytosolic FKBP12 using a tetrapeptide substrate in a protease coupled assay showed nearly 1000-fold preference for substrates in which the Xaa-Pro sequence was Phe-Pro vs. Glu-Pro [92]. Such a preference for a hydrophobic residue preceding the proline is counter to the usual location of prolines within full-length proteins where the Xaa is often a charged or polar residue in a surface exposed loop, helix, or chain reversal. To address this conundrum, a very recent study used the N2 domain of the gene-3-protein of phage fd as a bona fide protein substrate for which trans-cis isomerization of a single proline is rate-limiting [93]. By site-directed mutagenesis, all 20 amino acids were tested in the Xaa position, and folding was catalyzed using FKBP12 alone, or FKBP12 fused to the chaperone domain of *E. coli* SlyD. The specificity observed with FKBP12 alone was almost entirely abolished when FKBP12 was fused to the SlyD chaperone domain. This finding clarifies how PPIs can work on multiple substrates. It also points to the importance of chaperone-like surfaces for substrate binding of PPIs and/or the likely recruitment of their activities to substrates by interaction with chaperone partners. The striking enhancement of FKBP12 activity on protein substrates when fused to a chaperone domain [94] strongly supports the cooperation of PPIs with chaperones partners that is likely to occur in the ER too.

How do ER PPIs interact with substrates? We propose that each of the four different PPIs found in the ER (cyclophilin B, FKBP13, FKBP23, and FKBP65) contain chaperone-like substrate binding domains, or interact with other ER proteins capable of recruiting substrates. Consistent with this idea, while cyclophilin B contains no chaperone-like binding sites in its structure, it is part of a multi-protein complex that includes chaperones and other foldases in the ER [52]. FKBP65 itself harbors chaperone activity, and can bind collagen directly [95]. FKBP23 interacts with BiP [96] and can suppress its ATPase activity [97]. Although no partner interactions of FKBP13 have been reported, we suggest that it too has a luminal partner(s). Besides substrate recruitment, partner proteins could serve to target PPIs to specific roles in ERAF or ERAD, but further work is needed to clarify the mechanisms of interaction of the PPIs with other ER proteins and how they are regulated.

What other functions might PPIs have in the ER? The function of PPIs as molecular switches elsewhere in the cell [98] offers the intriguing possibility that PPIs may perform similar switch functions to regulate ER processes.

### 2.8. Recognition of misfolded proteins by UPR components

The unfolded protein response (UPR) has been extensively studied in the past few years. The UPR sensors IRE1, ATF6 and PERK have been characterized and their signaling mechanisms are well known and have been reviewed elsewhere [99,100]. The intraluminal domains of IRE1, PERK, and ATF6 have the ability to sense protein misfolding in the ER. There has been a question of whether they interact directly with unfolded proteins or whether there are intermediary proteins such as chaperones that are required. In the case of IRE1, the structure of the ER luminal domain has some similarity to the part of the structure of MHC1 that binds peptides [101]. However, the groove in this domain seems too narrow to bind peptides, and tight dimers of the domain occur in the absence of peptide, arguing against peptide binding as a mechanism for inducing oligomerization and signaling of IRE1. Still, later studies in yeast uncovered a two-step process of activation in which BiP that is bound to a juxtamembrane region of IRE1 is released, allowing for oligomerization but not full activation, followed by
unfolded protein binding to a “core stress sensing region” (CSSR) that induces a change in orientation of the cytosolic domains leading to fully activated IRE1 [102]. Recombinant CSSR that includes the MHC1-like groove showed chaperone activity *in vitro*, suggesting that it does in fact bind directly to misfolded proteins [102]. This two-step mechanism might allow the sensor to toggle between partially activated and fully activated states depending on the severity of stress. Similar mechanisms might be at play with PERK and ATF6, where the latter is also regulated by reduction of disulfide bridges. Recently, the structure at 3.2 Å resolution of a higher order oligomer of the IRE1 cytosolic domains crystallized with a kinase inhibitor suggested that molecules encountered in the cytosol may potently induce IRE1 signaling [103]. Further experiments will be needed to establish the exact mechanism and also to define how the luminal domains of PERK and ATF6 recognize unfolded proteins.

### 3. Protein interactions in the ER

An extensive bioinformatics survey for protein motifs that are known to be responsible for protein interactions in the cytosol revealed none in ER luminal proteins and in the domains of ER membrane proteins that are oriented into the ER [3]. How protein–protein interactions are mediated and controlled is not known. There are few known post-translational modifications that specify protein interactions and there are no protein kinases or phosphatases in the lumen of the ER.

How then are protein interactions in the ER regulated? There are two general possibilities for the formation of protein complexes in the ER. One is a dynamic model where ER chaperones and folding enzymes are recruited independently to nascent polypeptides as they enter the ER to assist folding [52,104] the other is that there are preformed complexes that are present in the ER and that they perform specific functions. One indication in favor of the latter model is that although there is a paucity of known protein interaction motifs in ER proteins, several ER complexes have been identified and their functions have been well-characterized.

#### 3.1. Redundancy and targeting to functional modules

Further support for the idea of functional preformed complexes comes from the many, seemingly redundant, proteins in the ER. Calreticulin and calnexin are very similar in sequence and in their Glc1Man9 binding properties, and there are several PDIs and several PPIs with similar enzyme activities. The clue to this paradox is that they perform different functions and so far there is evidence that these different functions are specified by their binding partners. That is, they exist in complexes with other proteins that generate the specificity for their partners, and perhaps their location in the ER. The best example of such specificity is the interaction of the protein disulfide isomerase ERp57 with the tip of the extended P-domain of calnexin (*Fig.* 2).

Another example of the control of the specificity of a protein disulfide isomerase is that of ERdj5 which has been shown to interact directly with EDEM, and BiP is also present in this complex [35]. ERDj5 is the most reductive of the protein disulfide isomerases and its binding to EDEM suggested that it acts to unfold proteins that are bound to EDEM and that BiP could maintain solubility of the unfolded substrates. There are no homologues in the ER of the yeast cytosolic Hsp104 protein that interacts with DnaJ/Hsp40 and Hsp70 chaperones to disaggregate misfolded proteins but the ERdj5 complex could have a similar role [105].

Sep15 is a small selenoprotein containing thioredoxin-like motifs that binds tightly to UGGT1 in the ER [106]. Although this interaction has been extensively characterized, its functional significance, perhaps to catalyze disulfide bond isomerization on

glycoproteins bound to UGGT, is not known. We have mentioned above the OS9, GRP94, XTP3-B interaction with the cytosolic HRD1/SEL1L ubiquitin ligase ERAD complex.

#### 3.2. Regulation of interactions

How are protein interactions in the ER controlled? So far there is no evidence for a dynamic state of any ER complex. The only regulatory mechanisms that are known are those that act at the transcriptional level to control responses to unfolded proteins and maintain and expand the ER. The homeostasis of the ER is maintained also by the selective return of ER membrane and luminal proteins by the retrograde transport of COP1 vesicles. In addition there is a potential mechanism to remodel the proteins of the ER by subjecting them to ERAD although how they would be selected is not clear.

Another potential mechanism is that of selective disulfide bond formation. This mechanism has not been frequently observed for interactions between ER proteins, and the interaction of ERp57 with tapasin during the assembly of the MHC1 complex, that was thought to be mediated by a disulfide bond, was shown to occur in the absence of the active site cysteines of ERp57 [107]. However, covalent bonding between PDIs and other ER proteins is a potential method of forming protein–protein interactions in the ER.

### 4. Mechanisms of recognition of misfolded proteins

In the environment of the ER there is a high concentration of molecular chaperones and enzymes involved in folding of nascent proteins. The question of how they discriminate between folded and misfolded proteins is central, not just for proteins in the ER but also molecular chaperone and protein quality control systems in the cytoplasm. It is generally accepted that the key to recognition of misfolded, partially folded proteins and unassembled complexes is the presence of exposed hydrophobic amino acid residues. An important point not discussed here, but gaining considerable weight is the specific location of misfolded lesions that are recognized by the quality control machinery for ERAD. Lesions can occur in cytosolic domains, luminal domains, and membrane domains, and as might be intuitively expected, lesions in different locations call for specialized quality control components, although similar downstream components can carry out the more “crude” steps of degradation. Thus, ERADL (luminal), ERADC (cytosolic), and ERADM (membrane) have been used to describe the different machineries involved in recognizing lesions in the locations specified. These pathways are currently best understood in yeast and have been reviewed elsewhere [108,109], although recent work has begun to illuminate their specific components in the mammalian ER as well [110].

There are not many structures of folded proteins and also of their misfolded mutants in which the elements responsible for recognition of misfolded proteins can be tested. We have used mutants of an enzyme that still has enzymatic activity, to define the sensitivity of UGGT to small structural changes. The recognition mechanism of UGGT can discriminate very small differences between folded and misfolded protein substrates.

For many cellular processes biology maintains quality through a mechanism known as kinetic proofreading. The concept of kinetic proofreading was initially developed by J.J. Hopfield and by Jacques Ninio to explain the fidelity of protein synthesis in bacterial cells [111,112]. At that time it was known that the aminoglycoside antibiotic, streptomycin, caused misincorporation of amino acids into polypeptides both *in vivo* and *in vitro*. These results drew attention to the processes that maintain the fidelity of protein synthesis. The fidelity of protein synthesis is maintained by a number of con-
trol processes that act at various steps of protein synthesis. One particular problem is the initial binding of tRNA to the ribosome, where the differences between the various aminoacyl-tRNAs is small and thus the probability of an error in polypeptide synthesis is high. The mechanism to prevent this is that the aminoacyl-tRNA binds to the ribosome, and undergoes a series of quality control steps where energy is put into the system, initially by the hydrolysis of GTP. This creates the first irreversible step in protein synthesis. Thus the solution to this and many other biological processes where there is little difference in energy between “correct” and “incorrect” decision is by a molecular ratchet that takes many steps that are irreversible by the input of energy and by some surveillance mechanism to test the product. Analogously in the case of protein folding there are a number of chaperones that act to prevent interactions between unfolded proteins and thereby to assist the folding of proteins.

From the perspective of the kinetic proofreading mechanism, the modifications made to the glucose and mannose moieties of the N-glycan by the various ER glucosidases and mannosidases represent a series of irreversible steps and could act as the molecular ratchet required to ensure progression. It is not clear if these enzymes recognize only the glycan or can also recognize misfolded or unfolded proteins. In the cases where this has been examined there have been no clear results that show that glucosidase II or the ER-mannosidase I can recognize misfolded proteins. Glucosidase II has two subunits: an α subunit that contains the catalytic domain and a β subunit that contains an MRH mannose binding motif [113,114]. Careful measurement of the rate of processing of Glc1Man9 and Glc2Man9 N-glycans on native and unfolded proteins revealed no differences although it has been known for some time that the cleavage of the Glc–Glc bond is more rapid than the Glc–Man bond. Thus it appears that the conformation of the N-glycoprotein is independent of the processing of the N-glycan by glucosidase II. At this time the only ER protein that is known to recognize the conformation of a secretory protein and modify its glycan is UGGT1. It seems that the other lectins rely on association with molecular chaperones and foldases to accomplish the recognition and modification of substrate proteins.

## 5. Conclusions

There appears to be an emerging principle that the recognition of misfolded glycoproteins in the ER lumen is accomplished by lectins specific for different glycoforms. They accomplish their chaperone functions by association with specific foldases. ER protein quality control is an important process and manifests itself in many protein trafficking diseases, such as cystic fibrosis and α1 antitrypsin deficiency, where mutant but otherwise functional proteins are retained in the ER. Strategies to develop efficient therapies that abrogate the ERQC and allow these mutant proteins to their correct cellular locations will require a comprehensive understanding of the recognition of misfolded proteins in cells.

## Acknowledgements

We apologize to those authors that we have not been able to cite due to space limitations. This research was funded by grants from the Canadian Institutes of Health research to DYT, JJMB and KG, and a CIHR CGS Doctoral Award and Fonds de la Recherche en Santé du Quebec Bourse de Doctorat to P. Määtänen. We also thank Dr. Guennadi Kozlov for the model shown in Fig. 4, and Jason C Young for his valuable suggestions.

---

### References

[1] Scott M, Lu G, Hallett M, Thomas DY. The Hera database and its use in the characterization of endoplasmic reticulum proteins. Bioinformatics 2004;20:937–44, doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bth010, bth010 [pii].

[2] Mulder NJ, Apweiler R, Attwood TK, Bairoch A, Barrell D, Bateman A, et al. The InterPro Database, 2003 brings increased coverage and new features. Nucl Acids Res 2003;31:315–8.

[3] Scott MS, Thomas DY, Hallett MT. Predicting subcellular localization via protein motif co-occurrence. Genome Res 2004;14:1957–66, doi:10.1101/gr.2650004, 14/10a/1957 [pii].

[4] Gilchrist A, Au CE, Hiding J, Bell AW, Fernandez-Rodriguez J, Lesimple S, et al. Quantitative proteomics analysis of the secretory pathway. Cell 2006;127:1265–81, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2006.10.036. S0092-8674(06)01426-7 [pii].

[5] Watanabe D, Yamada K, Nishina Y, Tajima Y, Koshimizu U, Nagata A, et al. Molecular cloning of a novel Ca(2+)-binding protein (calmegin) specifically expressed during male meiotic germ cell development. J Biol Chem 1994;269:7744–9.

[6] van Lith M, Hartigan N, Hatch J, Benham AM. PDILT, a divergent testis-specific protein disulfide isomerase with a non-classical SXXC motif that engages in disulfide-dependent interactions in the endoplasmic reticulum. J Biol Chem 2005;280:1376–83, doi:10.1074/jbc.M408651200. M408651200 [pii].

[7] Schrag JD, Procopio DO, Cygler M, Thomas DY, Bergeron JJ. Lectin control of protein folding and sorting in the secretory pathway. Trends Biochem Sci 2003;28:49–57. S096800040200004X [pii].

[8] Kamiya Y, Kamiya D, Yamamoto K, Nyfeler B, Hauri HP, Kato K. Molecular basis of sugar recognition by the human L-type lectins ERGIC-53, VIPL, and VIP36. J Biol Chem 2008;283:1857–61, doi:10.1074/jbc.M709384200. M709384200 [pii].

[9] Ou WJ, Cameron PH, Thomas DY, Bergeron JJ. Association of folding intermediates of glycoproteins with calnexin during protein maturation. Nature 1993;364:771–6, doi:10.1038/364771a0.

[10] Zapun A, Petrescu SM, Rudd PM, Dwek RA, Thomas DY, Bergeron JJ. Conformation-independent binding of monoglucosylated ribonuclease B to calnexin. Cell 1997;88:29–38. S0092-8674(00)81855-3 [pii].

[11] Williams DB. Beyond lectins: the calnexin/calreticulin chaperone system of the endoplasmic reticulum. J Cell Sci 2006;119:615–23, doi:10.1242/jcs.02856, 119/4/615 [pii].

[12] Schrag JD, Bergeron JJ, Li Y, Borisova S, Hahn M, Thomas DY, et al. The structure of calnexin, an ER chaperone involved in quality control of protein folding. Mol Cell 2001;8:633–44. S1097-2765(01)00318-5 [pii].

[13] Zapun A, Darby NJ, Tessier DC, Michalak M, Bergeron JJ, Thomas DY. Enhanced catalysis of ribonuclease B folding by the interaction of calnexin or calreticulin with ERp57. J Biol Chem 1998;273:6009–12.

[14] Frickel EM, Riek R, Jelesarov I, Helenius A, Wuthrich K, Ellgaard L. TROSY-NMR reveals interaction between ERp57 and the tip of the calreticulin P-domain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002;99:1954–9, doi:10.1073/pnas.042699099, 042699099 [pii].

[15] Pollock S, Kozlov G, Pelletier MF, Trempe JF, Jansen G, Sitnikov D, et al. Specific interaction of ERp57 and calnexin determined by NMR spectroscopy and an ER two-hybrid system. EMBO J 2004;23:1020–9, doi:10.1038/sj.emboj.7600119, 7600119 [pii].

[16] Kozlov G, Maattanen P, Schrag JD, Pollock S, Cygler M, Nagar B, et al. Crystal structure of the bb′ domains of the protein disulfide isomerase ERp57. Structure 2006;14:1331–9, doi:10.1016/j.str.2006.06.019. S0969-2126(06)00303-0 [pii].

[17] Jessop CE, Tavender TJ, Watkins RH, Chambers JE, Bulleid NJ. Substrate specificity of the oxidoreductase ERp57 is determined primarily by its interaction with calnexin and calreticulin. J Biol Chem 2009;284:2194–202, doi:10.1074/jbc.M808054200. M808054200 [pii].

[18] Schallus T, Jaeckh C, Feher K, Palma AS, Liu Y, Simpson JC, et al. Malectin: a novel carbohydrate-binding protein of the endoplasmic reticulum and a candidate player in the early steps of protein N-glycosylation. Mol Biol Cell 2008;19:3404–14, doi:10.1091/mbc.E08-04-0354. E08-04-0354 [pii].

[19] Trombetta ES, Parodi AJ. Quality control and protein folding in the secretory pathway. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2003;19:649–76, doi:10.1146/annurev.cellbio.19.110701.153949.

[20] Caramelo JJ, Castro OA, de Prat-Gay G, Parodi AJ. The endoplasmic reticulum glucosyltransferase recognizes nearly native glycoprotein folding intermediates. J Biol Chem 2004;279:46280–5.

[21] Taylor SC, Thibault P, Tessier DC, Bergeron JJ, Thomas DY. Glycopeptide specificity of the secretory protein folding sensor UDP-glucose glycoprotein:glucosyltransferase. EMBO Rep 2003;4:405–11, doi:10.1038/sj.emboj.embor.embor797, embor797 [pii].

[22] Taylor SC, Ferguson AD, Bergeron JJ, Thomas DY0. The ER protein folding sensor UDP-glucose: glycoprotein-glucosyltransferase modifies substrates distant to local changes in glycoprotein conformation. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2004;11:128–34, doi:10.1038/nsmb715, nsmb715 [pii].

[23] Ritter C, Quirin K, Kowarik M, Helenius A. Minor folding defects trigger local modification of glycoproteins by the ER folding sensor GT. EMBO J 2005;24:1730–8, doi:10.1038/sj.emboj.7600645, 7600645 [pii].

[24] Keith N, Parodi AJ, Caramelo JJ. Glycoprotein tertiary and quaternary structures are monitored by the same quality control mechanism. J Biol Chem 2005;280:18138–41, doi:10.1074/jbc.M501710200. M501710200 [pii].

[25] Wada I, Kai M, Imai S, Sakane F, Kanoh H. Promotion of transferrin folding by cyclic interactions with calnexin and calreticulin. EMBO J 1997;16:5420–32, doi:10.1093/emboj/16.17.5420.

[26] Pearse BR, Gabriel L, Wang N, Hebert DN. A cell-based reglucosylation assay demonstrates the role of GT1 in the quality control of a maturing glycoprotein. J Cell Biol 2008;181:309–20, doi:10.1083/jcb.200712068, jcb.200712068 [pii].

[27] Arnold SM, Fessler LI, Fessler JH, Kaufman RJ. Two homologues encoding human UDP-glucose:glycoprotein glucosyltransferase differ in mRNA expression and enzymatic activity. Biochemistry 2000;39:2149–63, bi9916473 [pii].

[28] Shahinian S, Dijkgraaf GJ, Sdicu AM, Thomas DY, Jakob CA, Aebi M, et al. Involvement of protein N-glycosyl chain glucosylation and processing in the biosynthesis of cell wall beta-1,6-glucan of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Genetics 1998;149:843–56.

[29] Jakob CA, Bodmer D, Spirig U, Battig P, Marcil A, Dignard D, et al. Htm1p, a mannosidase-like protein, is involved in glycoprotein degradation in yeast. EMBO Rep 2001;2:423–30, doi:10.1093/embo-reports/kve089, 2/5/423 [pii].

[30] Hosokawa N, Wada I, Hasegawa K, Yorihuzi T, Tremblay LO, Herscovics A, et al. A novel ER alpha-mannosidase-like protein accelerates ER-associated degradation. EMBO Rep 2001;2:415–22, doi:10.1093/embo-reports/kve084, 2/5/415 [pii].

[31] Clerc S, Hirsch C, Oggier DM, Deprez P, Jakob C, Sommer T, et al. Htm1 protein generates the N-glycan signal for glycoprotein degradation in the endoplasmic reticulum. J Cell Biol 2009;184:159–72, doi:10.1083/jcb.200809198, jcb.200809198 [pii].

[32] Xie W, Kanehara K, Sayeed A, Ng DT. Intrinsic conformational determinants signal protein misfolding to the Hrd1/Htm1 endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation system. Mol Biol Cell 2009;20:3317–29, doi:10.1091/mbc.E09-03-0231. E09-03-0231 [pii].

[33] Hirao K, Natsuka Y, Tamura T, Wada I, Morito D, Natsuka S, et al. EDEM3, a soluble EDEM homolog, enhances glycoprotein endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation and mannose trimming. J Biol Chem 2006;281:9650–8, doi:10.1074/jbc.M512191200. M512191200 [pii].

[34] Hosokawa N, Tremblay LO, Sleno B, Kamiya Y, Wada I, Nagata K, et al. EDEM1 accelerates the trimming of alpha-1,2-linked mannose on the C branch of N-glycans. Glycobiology, in press doi:10.1093/glycob/cwq001, cwq001 [pii].

[35] Ushioda R, Hoseki J, Araki K, Jansen G, Thomas DY, Nagata K. ERdj5 is required as a disulfide reductase for degradation of misfolded proteins in the ER. Science 2008;321:569–72, doi:10.1126/science.1159293, 321/5888/569 [pii].

[36] Hosokawa N, Kamiya Y, Kato K. The role of MRH domain-containing lectins in ERAD. Glycobiology, in press doi:10.1093/glycob/cwq013, cwq013 [pii].

[37] Gauss R, Jarosch E, Sommer T, Hirsch C. A complex of Yos9p and the HRD ligase integrates endoplasmic reticulum quality control into the degradation machinery. Nat Cell Biol 2006;8:849–54, doi:10.1038/ncb1445, ncb1445 [pii].

[38] Christianson JC, Shaler TA, Tyler RE, Kopito RR. OS-9 and GRP94 deliver mutant alpha1-antitrypsin to the Hrd1-SEL1L ubiquitin ligase complex for ERAD. Nat Cell Biol 2008;10:272–82, doi:10.1038/ncb1689, ncb1689 [pii].

[39] Otte S, Barlowe C. Sorting signals can direct receptor-mediated export of soluble proteins into COPII vesicles. Nat Cell Biol 2004;6:1189–94, doi:10.1038/ncb1195, ncb1195 [pii].

[40] Ashok A, Hegde RS. Selective processing and metabolism of disease-causing mutant prion proteins. PLoS Pathog 2009;5:e1000479, doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1000479.

[41] Wang S, Ng DT. Evasion of ER surveillance makes Wsc1p an obligate substrate of golgi quality control. Mol Biol Cell, in press doi:10.1091/mbc.E09-10-0910, E09-10-0910 [pii].

[42] Dominguez M, Dejgaard K, Fullekrug J, Dahan S, Fazel A, Paccaud JP, et al. gp25L/emp24/p24 protein family members of the cis-Golgi network bind both COP I and II coatomer. J Cell Biol 1998;140:751–65.

[43] Marzioch M, Henthorn DC, Herrmann JM, Wilson R, Thomas DY, Bergeron JJ, et al. Erp1p and Erp2p, partners for Emp24p and Erv25p in a yeast p24 complex. Mol Biol Cell 1999;10:1923–38.

[44] Springer S, Chen E, Duden R, Marzioch M, Rowley A, Hamamoto S, et al. The p24 proteins are not essential for vesicular transport in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000;97:4034–9, doi:10.1073/pnas.070044097, 070044097 [pii].

[45] Anantharaman V, Aravind L. The GOLD domain, a novel protein module involved in Golgi function and secretion. Genome Biol 2002;3, research0023.

[46] Strating JR, Martens GJ. The p24 family and selective transport processes at the ER-Golgi interface. Biol Cell 2009;101:495–509, doi:10.1042/BC20080233, BC20080233 [pii].

[47] Chen F, Hasegawa H, Schmitt-Ulms G, Kawarai T, Bohm C, Katayama T, et al. TMP21 is a presenilin complex component that modulates gamma-secretase but not epsilon-secretase activity. Nature 2006;440:1208–12, doi:10.1038/nature04667, nature04667 [pii].

[48] Otero JH, Lizak B, Hendershot LM. Life and death of a BiP substrate. Semin Cell Dev Biol 2009, doi:10.1016/j.semcdb.2009.12.008. S1084-9521(09)00253-5 [pii].

[49] Blond-Elguindi S, Cwirla SE, Dower WJ, Lipshutz RJ, Sprang SR, Sambrook JF, et al. Affinity panning of a library of peptides displayed on

bacteriophages reveals the binding specificity of BiP. Cell 1993;75:717–28, 0092-8674(93)90492-9 [pii].

[50] Rudiger S, Buchberger A, Bukau B. Interaction of Hsp70 chaperones with substrates. Nat Struct Biol 1997;4:342–9.

[51] Matlack KE, Misselwitz B, Plath K, Rapoport TA. BiP acts as a molecular ratchet during posttranslational transport of prepro-alpha factor across the ER membrane. Cell 1999;97:553–64. S0092-8674(00)80767-9 [pii].

[52] Meunier L, Usherwood YK, Chung KT, Hendershot LM. A subset of chaperones and folding enzymes form multiprotein complexes in endoplasmic reticulum to bind nascent proteins. Mol Biol Cell 2002;13:4456–69, doi:10.1091/mbc.E02-05-0311.

[53] Jin Y, Awad W, Petrova K, Hendershot LM. Regulated release of ERdj3 from unfolded proteins by BiP. EMBO J 2008;27:2873–82, doi:10.1038/emboj.2008.207, emboj2008207 [pii].

[54] Jin Y, Zhuang M, Hendershot LM. ERdj3, a luminal ER DnaJ homologue, binds directly to unfolded proteins in the mammalian ER: identification of critical residues. Biochemistry 2009;48:41–9, doi:10.1021/bi8015923.

[55] Weitzmann A, Volkmer J, Zimmermann R. The nucleotide exchange factor activity of Grp170 may explain the non-lethal phenotype of loss of Sil1 function in man and mouse. FEBS Lett 2006;580:5237–40, doi:10.1016/j.febslet.2006.08.055. S0014-7793(06)01038-6 [pii].

[56] Dong M, Bridges JP, Apsley K, Xu Y, Weaver TE. ERdj4 and ERdj5 are required for endoplasmic reticulum-associated protein degradation of misfolded surfactant protein C. Mol Biol Cell 2008;19:2620–30, doi:10.1091/mbc.E07-07-0674. E07-07-0674 [pii].

[57] Petrova K, Oyadomari S, Hendershot LM, Ron D. Regulated association of misfolded endoplasmic reticulum lumenal proteins with P58/DNAJc3. EMBO J 2008;27:2862–72, doi:10.1038/emboj.2008.199, emboj2008199 [pii].

[58] Hammond C, Helenius A. Folding of VSV G protein: sequential interaction with BiP and calnexin. Science 1994;266:456–8.

[59] Sorgjerd K, Ghafouri B, Jonsson BH, Kelly JW, Blond SY, Hammarstrom P. Retention of misfolded mutant transthyretin by the chaperone BiP/GRP78 mitigates amyloidogenesis. J Mol Biol 2006;356:469–82, doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2005.11.051. S0022-2836(05)01455-5 [pii].

[60] Farinha CM, Amaral MD. Most F508del-CFTR is targeted to degradation at an early folding checkpoint and independently of calnexin. Mol Cell Biol 2005;25:5242–52, doi:10.1128/MCB.25.12.5242-5252.2005, 25/12/5242 [pii].

[61] Shimizu Y, Hendershot LM. Organization of the functions and components of the endoplasmic reticulum. Adv Exp Med Biol 2007;594:37–46, doi:10.1007/978-0-387-39975-1_4.

[62] Mayer M, Kies U, Kammermeier R, Buchner J. BiP and PDI cooperate in the oxidative folding of antibodies in vitro. J Biol Chem 2000;275:29421–5, doi:10.1074/jbc.M002655200 [002655200M] [pii].

[63] Feige MJ, Groscurth S, Marcinowski M, Shimizu Y, Kessler H, Hendershot LM, et al. An unfolded CH1 domain controls the assembly and secretion of IgG antibodies. Mol Cell 2009;34:569–79, doi:10.1016/j.molcel.2009.04.028. S1097-2765(09)00304-9 [pii].

[64] Kahali S, Sarcar B, Fang B, Williams ES, Koomen JM, Tofilon PJ, et al. Activation of the unfolded protein response contributes toward the antitumor activity of vorinostat. Neoplasia 2010;12:80–6.

[65] Hutt DM, Herman D, Rodrigues AP, Noel S, Pilewski JM, Matteson J, et al. Reduced histone deacetylase 7 activity restores function to misfolded CFTR in cystic fibrosis. Nat Chem Biol 2010;6:25–33, doi 10.1038/nchembio.275, nchembio.275 [pii].

[66] Ledford BE, Leno GH. ADP-ribosylation of the molecular chaperone GRP78/BiP. Mol Cell Biochem 1994;138:141–8.

[67] Sevier CS, Kaiser CA. Ero1 and redox homeostasis in the endoplasmic reticulum. Biochim Biophys Acta 2008;1783:549–56, doi:10.1016/j.bbamcr.2007.12.011. S0167-4889(07)00315-1 [pii].

[68] Merksamer PI, Trusina A, Papa FR. Real-time redox measurements during endoplasmic reticulum stress reveal interlinked protein folding functions. Cell 2008;135:933–47, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2008.10.011. S0092-8674(08)01301-9 [pii].

[69] Dorner AJ, Wasley LC, Raney P, Haugejorden S, Green M, Kaufman RJ. The stress response in Chinese hamster ovary cells. Regulation of ERP72 and protein disulfide isomerase expression and secretion. J Biol Chem 1990;265:22029–34.

[70] Cai H, Wang CC, Tsou CL. Chaperone-like activity of protein disulfide isomerase in the refolding of a protein with no disulfide bonds. J Biol Chem 1994;269:24550–2.

[71] McLaughlin SH, Bulleid NJ. Thiol-independent interaction of protein disulfide isomerase with type X collagen during intra-cellular folding and assembly. Biochem J 1998;331(Pt 3):793–800.

[72] Denisov AY, Maattanen P, Dabrowski C, Kozlov G, Thomas DY, Gehring K. Solution structure of the bb′ domains of human protein disulfide isomerase. FEBS J 2009;276:1440–9, doi:10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.06884.x. EJB6884 [pii].

[73] Molinari M, Galli C, Piccaluga V, Pieren M, Paganetti P. Sequential assistance of molecular chaperones and transient formation of covalent complexes during protein degradation from the ER. J Cell Biol 2002;158:247–57, doi:10.1083/jcb.200204122, jcb.200204122 [pii].

[74] Lee SO, Cho K, Cho S, Kim I, Oh C, Ahn K. Protein disulphide isomerase is required for signal peptide peptidase-mediated protein degradation. EMBO J 2010; 29:363–75, doi:10.1038/emboj.2009.359, emboj2009359 [pii].

[75] Maattanen P, Kozlov G, Gehring K, Thomas DY. ERp57 and PDI: multifunctional protein disulfide isomerases with similar domain architectures but differing substrate-partner associations. Biochem Cell Biol 2006; 84:881–9, doi:10.1139/o06-186, 006-186 [pii].

[76] Alanen HI, Williamson RA, Howard MJ, Hatahet FS, Salo KE, Kauppila A, et al. ERp27, a new non-catalytic endoplasmic reticulum-located human protein disulfide isomerase family member, interacts with ERp57. J Biol Chem 2006; 281:33727–38, doi:10.1074/jbc.M604314200. M604314200 [pii].

[77] Das S, Smith TD, Sarma JD, Ritzenthaler JD, Maza J, Kaplan BE, et al. ERp29 restricts Connexin43 oligomerization in the endoplasmic reticulum. Mol Biol Cell 2009; 20:2593–604, doi:10.1091/mbc.E08-07-0790. E08-07-0790 [pii].

[78] Jessop CE, Watkins RH, Simmons JJ, Tasab M, Bulleid NJ. Protein disulphide isomerase family members show distinct substrate specificity: P5 is targeted to BiP client proteins. J Cell Sci 2009; 122:4287–95, doi:10.1242/jcs.059154, jcs.059154 [pii].

[79] Park SW, Zhen G, Verhaeghe C, Nakagami Y, Nguyenvu LT, Barczak AJ, et al. The protein disulfide isomerase AGR2 is essential for production of intestinal mucus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009; 106:6950–5, doi:10.1073/pnas.0808722106, 0808722106 [pii].

[80] Pirneskoski A, Klappa P, Lobell M, Williamson RA, Byrne L, Alanen HI, et al. Molecular characterization of the principal substrate binding site of the ubiquitous folding catalyst protein disulfide isomerase. J Biol Chem 2004; 279:10374–81.

[81] Nguyen VD, Wallis K, Howard MJ, Haapalainen AM, Salo KE, Saaranen MJ, et al. Alternative conformations of the x region of human protein disulphide-isomerase modulate exposure of the substrate binding b′ domain. J Mol Biol 2008; 383:1144–55, doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2008.08.085. S0022-2836(08)01103-0 [pii].

[82] Byrne LJ, Sidhu A, Wallis AK, Ruddock LW, Freedman RB, Howard MJ, et al. Mapping of the ligand-binding site on the b′ domain of human PDI: interaction with peptide ligands and the x-linker region. Biochem J 2009; 423:209–17, doi:10.1042/BJ20090565. BJ20090565 [pii].

[83] Frickel EM, Frei P, Bouvier M, Stafford WF, Helenius A, Glockshuber R, et al. ERp57 is a multifunctional thiol-disulfide oxidoreductase. J Biol Chem 2004; 279:18277–87, doi:10.1074/jbc.M314089200, 314089200M [pii].

[84] Aslund F, Berndt KD, Holmgren A. Redox potentials of glutaredoxins and other thiol-disulfide oxidoreductases of the thioredoxin superfamily determined by direct protein-protein redox equilibria. J Biol Chem 1997; 272:30780–6.

[85] Appenzeller-Herzog C, Ellgaard L. In vivo reduction-oxidation state of protein disulfide isomerase: the two active sites independently occur in the reduced and oxidized forms. Antioxid Redox Signal 2008; 10:55–64, doi:10.1089/ars.2007.1837.

[86] Lundstrom J, Holmgren A. Determination of the reduction-oxidation potential of the thioredoxin-like domains of protein disulfide-isomerase from the equilibrium with glutathione and thioredoxin. Biochemistry 1993; 32:6649–55.

[87] Riemer J, Appenzeller-Herzog C, Johansson L, Bodenmiller B, Hartmann-Petersen R, Ellgaard L. A luminal flavoprotein in endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009; 106:14831–6, doi:10.1073/pnas.0900742106, 0900742106 [pii].

[88] Jager M, Pluckthun A. The rate-limiting steps for the folding of an antibody scFv fragment. FEBS Lett 1997; 418:106–10. S0014-5793(97)01350-1 [pii].

[89] Schmid FX, Baldwin RL. Acid catalysis of the formation of the slow-folding species of RNase A: evidence that the reaction is proline isomerization. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1978; 75:4764–8.

[90] McPhie P. Kinetic studies on the unfolding and refolding of pepsinogen in urea. The nature of the rate-limiting step. J Biol Chem 1980; 255:4048–52.

[91] Lilie H, Rudolph R, Buchner J. Association of antibody chains at different stages of folding: prolyl isomerization occurs after formation of quaternary structure. J Mol Biol 1995; 248:190–201, doi:10.1006/jmbi.1995.0211.

[92] Harrison RK, Stein RL. Substrate specificities of the peptidyl prolyl cis-trans isomerase activities of cyclophilin and FK-506 binding protein: evidence for the existence of a family of distinct enzymes. Biochemistry 1990; 29:3813–6.

[93] Jakob RP, Zoldak G, Aumuller T, Schmid FX. Chaperone domains convert prolyl isomerases into generic catalysts of protein folding. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009; 106:20282–7, doi:10.1073/pnas.0909544106, 0909544106 [pii].

[94] Knappe TA, Eckert B, Schaarschmidt P, Scholz C, Schmid FX. Insertion of a chaperone domain converts FKBP12 into a powerful catalyst of protein folding. J Mol Biol 2007; 368:1458–68, doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2007.02.097. S0022-2836(07)00361-0 [pii].

[95] Ishikawa Y, Vranka J, Wirz J, Nagata K, Bachinger HP. The rough endoplasmic reticulum-resident FK506-binding protein FKBP65 is a molecular chaperone that interacts with collagens. J Biol Chem 2008; 283:31584–90, doi:10.1074/jbc.M802535200. M802535200 [pii].

[96] Zhang X, Wang Y, Li H, Zhang W, Wu D, Mi H. The mouse FKBP23 binds to BiP in ER and the binding of C-terminal domain is interrelated with Ca2+ concentration. FEBS Lett 2004; 559:57–60, doi:10.1016/S0014-5793(04)00024-9, 0014579304000249S [pii].

[97] Wang Y, Han R, Wu D, Li J, Chen C, Ma H, et al. The binding of FKBP23 to BiP modulates BiP’s ATPase activity with its PPIase activity. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2007; 354:315–20, doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.12.209.

[98] Lu KP, Finn G, Lee TH, Nicholson LK. Prolyl cis-trans isomerization as a molecular timer. Nat Chem Biol 2007; 3:619–29, doi:10.1038/nchembio.2007.35, nchembio.2007.35 [pii].

[99] Ron D, Walter P. Signal integration in the endoplasmic reticulum unfolded protein response. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2007; 8:519–29, doi:10.1038/nrm2199, nrm2199 [pii].

[100] Bernales S, Papa FR, Walter P. Intracellular signaling by the unfolded protein response. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2006; 22:487–508, doi:10.1146/annurev.cellbio.21.122303.120200.

[101] Zhou J, Liu CY, Back SH, Clark RL, Peisach D, Xu Z, et al. The crystal structure of human IRE1 luminal domain reveals a conserved dimerization interface required for activation of the unfolded protein response. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006; 103:14343–8, doi:10.1073/pnas.0606480103, 0606480103 [pii].

[102] Kimata Y, Ishiwata-Kimata Y, Ito T, Hirata A, Suzuki T, Oikawa D, et al. Two regulatory steps of ER-stress sensor Ire1 involving its cluster formation and interaction with unfolded proteins. J Cell Biol 2007; 179:75–86, doi:10.1083/jcb.200704166, jcb.200704166 [pii].

[103] Korennykh AV, Egea PF, Korostelev AA, Finer-Moore J, Zhang C, Shokat KM, et al. The unfolded protein response signals through high-order assembly of Ire1. Nature 2009; 457:687–93, doi:10.1038/nature07661, nature07661 [pii].

[104] Kim PS, Bole D, Arvan P. Transient aggregation of nascent thyroglobulin in the endoplasmic reticulum: relationship to the molecular chaperone, BiP. J Cell Biol 1992; 118:541–9.

[105] Glover JR, Lum R. Remodeling of protein aggregates by Hsp104. Protein Pept Lett 2009; 16:587–97.

[106] Labunskyy VM, Ferguson AD, Fomenko DE, Chelliah Y, Hatfield DL, Gladyshev VN. A novel cysteine-rich domain of Sep15 mediates the interaction with UDP-glucose: glycoprotein glucosyltransferase. J Biol Chem 2005; 280:37839–45, doi:10.1074/jbc.M508685200. M508685200 [pii].

[107] Vigneron N, Peaper DR, Leonhardt RM, Cresswell P. Functional significance of tapasin membrane association and disulfide linkage to ERp57 in MHC class I presentation. Eur J Immunol 2009; 39:2371–6, doi:10.1002/eji.200939536.

[108] Nakatsukasa K, Brodsky JL. The recognition and retrotranslocation of misfolded proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum. Traffic 2008; 9:861–70, doi:10.1111/j.1600-0854.2008.00729.x. TRA729 [pii].

[109] Kanehara K, Kawaguchi S, Ng DT. The EDEM and Yos9p families of lectin-like ERAD factors. Semin Cell Dev Biol 2007; 18:743–50, doi:10.1016/j.semcdb.2007.09.007. S1084-9521(07)00145-0 [pii].

[110] Bernasconi R, Galli C, Calanca V, Nakajima T, Molinari M. Stringent requirement for HRD1, SEL1L, and OS-9/XTP3-B for disposal of ERAD-LS substrates. J Cell Biol 2010; 188:223–35, doi:10.1083/jcb.200910042, jcb.200910042 [pii].

[111] Hopfield JJ. Kinetic proofreading: a new mechanism for reducing errors in biosynthetic processes requiring high specificity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1974; 71:4135–9.

[112] Ninio J. Kinetic amplification of enzyme discrimination. Biochimie 1975; 57:587–95.

[113] Munro S. The MRH domain suggests a shared ancestry for the mannose 6-phosphate receptors and other N-glycan-recognising proteins. Curr Biol 2001; 11:R499–501. S0960-9822(01)00302-5 [pii].

[114] Pelletier MF, Marcil A, Sevigny G, Jakob CA, Tessier DC, Chevet E, et al. The heterodimeric structure of glucosidase II is required for its activity, solubility, and localization in vivo. Glycobiology 2000; 10:815–27.

[115] Dejgaard K, Theberge JF, Heath-Engel H, Chevet E, Tremblay ML, Thomas DY. Organization of the Sec61 translocon, studied by high resolution native electrophoresis. J Proteome Res 2010, doi:10.1021/pr900900x.

[116] Denisov AY, Maattanen P, Sprules T, Thomas DY, Gehring K. 1H, 13C and 15N resonance assignments of the bb′ domains of human protein disulfide isomerase. Biomol NMR Assign 2007; 1:129–30, doi:10.1007/s12104-007-9035-y.

[117] Sousa MC, Ferrero-Garcia MA, Parodi AJ. Recognition of the oligosaccharide and protein moieties of glycoproteins by the UDP-Glc:glycoprotein glucosyltransferase. Biochemistry 1992; 31(1):97–105. PubMed PMID: 1531024.
