
LETTER

doi:10.1038/nature09555

# Glycoprotein organization of Chikungunya virus particles revealed by X-ray crystallography

James E. Voss${}^{1,2}$, Marie-Christine Vaney${}^{1,2}$, Stéphane Duquerroy${}^{1,2,3}$, Clemens Vonrhein${}^{4}$, Christine Girard-Blanc${}^{5,6}$, Elodie Crublet${}^{5,6}$, Andrew Thompson${}^{7}$, Gérard Bricogne${}^{4}$ & Félix A. Rey${}^{1,2}$

Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) is an emerging mosquito-borne alphavirus that has caused widespread outbreaks of debilitating human disease in the past five years${}^{1}$. CHIKV invasion of susceptible cells is mediated by two viral glycoproteins, E1 and E2, which carry the main antigenic determinants and form an icosahedral shell at the virion surface. Glycoprotein E2, derived from furin cleavage of the p62 precursor into E3 and E2, is responsible for receptor binding, and E1 for membrane fusion. In the context of a concerted multidisciplinary effort to understand the biology of CHIKV${}^{2}$, here we report the crystal structures of the precursor p62–E1 heterodimer and of the mature E3–E2–E1 glycoprotein complexes. The resulting atomic models allow the synthesis of a wealth of genetic, biochemical, immunological and electron microscopy data accumulated over the years on alphaviruses in general. This combination yields a detailed picture of the functional architecture of the 25 MDa alphavirus surface glycoprotein shell. Together with the accompanying report on the structure of the Sindbis virus E2–E1 heterodimer at acidic pH (ref. 3), this work also provides new insight into the acid-triggered conformational change on the virus particle and its inbuilt inhibition mechanism in the immature complex.

Although the symptoms of the disease were first described in the eighteenth century${}^{4}$, CHIKV was first isolated only in 1952 during a dengue outbreak in Tanzania${}^{5}$. The name Chikungunya means “stooped walk” in the Tanzanian Kimakonde language${}^{6}$, an allusion to the persistent arthralgia caused by the disease, which otherwise shares clinical similarities with dengue disease${}^{7}$. CHIKV is geographically spread throughout vast regions of Africa and Asia, but remained essentially neglected until an important epidemic outbreak in 2005 in islands of the Indian Ocean${}^{8}$ attracted the attention of the western world. This outbreak was the consequence of an adaptation of CHIKV to efficiently infect *Aedes albopictus* mosquitoes in addition to the normal vector *Aedes aegypti*, and important determinants of the new vector adaptation were mapped to the CHIKV envelope proteins${}^{9,10}$. The presence of the new mosquito vector in many areas of Europe and the Americas${}^{11}$ raises concerns of further expansion of the endemic zones.

p62 and E1 are type I membrane proteins that are derived from a structural polyprotein precursor (Supplementary Fig. 1a). Their cotranslational association, in the endoplasmic reticulum of the infected cell, into a p62–E1 heterodimer is required for proper folding. In turn, the heterodimers trimerize to form the viral ‘spikes’. Furin maturation of p62 into E3 and E2 during transport to the cell surface primes the spikes for subsequent fusogenic activation for cell entry. Mature virions bud at the plasma membrane via interactions between E2 and genome-containing viral nucleocapsids present in the cytoplasm. The recently reported cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) reconstruction of CHIKV virion-like particles confirmed that all alphaviruses have a common architecture${}^{12}$. The particles are organized with icosahedral symmetry of triangulation $T = 4$, containing 80 spikes that make a glycoprotein shell enclosing the viral membrane and the nucleocapsid. E3, which contains the 64 amino-terminal residues of p62${}^{13}$, remains peripherally attached to virions for some alphaviruses${}^{14}$.

Alphaviruses enter cells via receptor-mediated endocytosis${}^{15}$. The acidic endosomal environment triggers an irreversible conformational rearrangement of the surface glycoprotein shell of mature virions${}^{16}$. The E2–E1 heterodimer dissociates and E1 rearranges into fusogenic homotrimers that induce fusion of viral and endosomal membranes${}^{17,18}$, allowing the release of the viral nucleocapsid into the cytosol. The crystal structure of the alphavirus E1 ectodomain has been determined in both pre-${}^{19}$ and post-fusion${}^{20}$ conformations, showing that it is folded into three β-sheet-rich domains (domains I, II and III; Fig. 1a), with an internal fusion loop at the tip of domain II${}^{21}$. The structure of alphavirus E2, in contrast, has remained elusive over the years. We adopted the strategy described in Methods to produce, crystallize and determine the 2.2-Å-resolution structure of recombinant CHIKV p62–E1 and furin-processed, mature E3–E2–E1 glycoprotein complexes.

The structure shows that the p62–E1 heterodimer has the shape of a twisted plate about 150 Å long, 50 Å wide and 25 Å thick (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Fig. 3), with E3 sticking out at one side (Fig. 1a inset, and Supplementary Fig. 3a). The furin site is in an exposed loop at the surface of the spike (Fig. 1a). The mature E3–E2–E1 complex is very similar, the only important difference being in the residues forming the furin loop, which become disordered on cleavage. E3 is an α/β protein, with an N-terminal β-hairpin packing against three α-helices organized into a horseshoe shape (Supplementary Fig. 4c). E2 is an all β protein belonging to the immunoglobulin superfamily, with three immunoglobulin domains labelled A, B and C in amino- to carboxy-terminal order (Fig. 1b). Domain B is at the membrane distal end and domain C is towards the viral membrane, with domain A at the centre. Domain B is presented at the tip of a long β-ribbon connector (Supplementary Fig. 4b), which makes most of the contacts with E3 (Supplementary Fig. 5). A detailed description of the individual domains is provided in Supplementary Information.

In the complex, E1 makes no direct contact with E3, interacting laterally with E2 all along domain II. Furthermore, the segment immediately downstream of domain III makes an additional strand inserted in E2 domain C. E1 is bent compared to its structure in isolation, with the fusion loop unfolded to make a short β-hairpin inserted in a groove between domains A and B (Figs 1a and 2). This conformation is stabilized by a number of E2 histidine side chains (Fig. 2a), some of which hydrogen bond to the main chain of the E1 fusion loop. The area buried from solvent per protomer in the E2–E1 complex is about 2,500 Å${}^{2}$ (Supplementary Fig. 3 and Supplementary Table 4a), which is large compared to the 1,100 Å${}^{2}$ buried in the flavivirus E homodimer${}^{22}$. The α-helical portion of E3 packs against the E2 β-ribbon, burying 800 Å${}^{2}$ of its surface from solvent (Supplementary Table 4b) at the region

---

${}^{1}$Institut Pasteur, Département de Virologie, Unité de Virologie Structurale, 25 rue du Dr Roux, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France. ${}^{2}$CNRS URA 3015, 25 rue du Dr Roux, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France. ${}^{3}$Université Paris-Sud, Faculté d’Orsay, 91405 Orsay Cedex, France. ${}^{4}$Global Phasing Ltd, Sheraton House, Castle Park, Cambridge CB3 0AX, United Kingdom. ${}^{5}$Institut Pasteur, Département de Biologie Structurale et Chimie, Plateforme de Production de protéines recombinantes, 25 rue du Dr Roux, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France. ${}^{6}$CNRS URA 2185, 25 rue du Dr Roux, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France. ${}^{7}$Synchrotron SOLEIL, L’Orme de Merisiers, BP 48 St Aubin, 91192 Gif sur Yvette, France.

RESEARCH LETTER

a
b

N terminal
Furin loop
E2 domain A
E2 β-ribbon
N263
E2 domain C
E1 domain III
E1 domain I
Membrane
E1 domain II
E2 domain B
N12
E3
E1 FL
E3
N terminal
Furin loop
Central arch
N12
Arch 1
C terminal
E2 domain B
E2 domain A
E2 domain C
50 Å

Figure 1 | Structure of the p62–E1 heterodimer. a, Ribbon diagram of the p62–E1 heterodimer. E1 domains I, II and III are shown in red, yellow and blue, respectively, and the fusion loop (FL) in orange. E3 is coloured white/grey and E2 domain A is coloured cyan, B dark green, C pink and the β-ribbon dark purple. The N-linked glycans are shown in ball and stick, coloured according to atom type, and labelled. The disulphides are depicted as green sticks. The black arrow (next to the pink and blue stars indicating the C termini of p62 and E1, respectively) points to the viral membrane. Inset, schematic diagram, with the heterodimer ‘plate’ drawn ‘untwisted’, showing how the domains are positioned with respect to one another and their connectivity. b, p62 organization, oriented roughly at 90 degrees from a to show E3. Green numbers label the disulphides according to Supplementary Fig. 1b.

We built a model for the whole glycoprotein layer of the alphavirus particle (Fig. 3) by fitting the structure of the CHIKV E2–E1 heterodimer into the available cryo-EM reconstructions of alphavirus particles as explained in Supplementary Information (Supplementary Fig. 6). The result gives the intra- and interspike contact details (Supplementary Table 4c, d), confirming that E2 and E1 make all the intra- and interspike contacts, respectively. Domain A makes three-fold contacts at the spike top, with domain B projecting to the side to give the spike its characteristic propeller shape. Domain C is sandwiched between domain II of two neighbouring E1 molecules, making the walls of a central cavity under domain A, centred on the three-fold axis of the spike.

The inferred atomic model is consistent with the available biological data on alphaviruses, with mutations conferring escape to neutralizing antibodies mostly clustered on domain B, as well as the top of domain A (Supplementary Figs 1b, 7 and Supplementary Table 6). Furthermore, the mutations affecting tissue tropism and host range also map to domains A and B, as described in Supplementary Information and illustrated in Supplementary Fig. 1b and Supplementary Table 7. In particular, a number of determinants for efficient mosquito midgut infectivity of CHIKV²⁴ and other alphaviruses (Supplementary Table 7c) map to the ‘wings’ and the FG loop (see Supplementary Information) at the top of domain A. It is noteworthy that domain A, exposed at the top of the spike, is clearly homologous to domain III of the flavivirus envelope protein E (ref. 22) (Supplementary Fig. 4a and Supplementary

Figure 2 | The E1 fusion loop binding groove in E2. a, Fusion loop contacts. E2 (in a transparent surface rendering) and E1 (in ribbons) are in the background and foreground, respectively. Dotted white lines show hydrogen bonds from E2 histidines to the fusion loop main chain. Residues marking the E2 transitional epitope²⁶,²⁸, are coloured red and labelled. Green numbers highlight the cluster of disulphide bonds in this part of the complex. The residue Ala 226 is shown as a grey sphere. b, E1 conformation. The 3 Å Semliki Forest virus (SFV) E1 model (PDB code 2ALA), coloured by domains with the fusion loop cyan, is shown superposed on E1 from the p62–E1 complex, in grey with the fusion loop orange. The black arrow emphasizes the movement of the fusion loop and the adjacent ij loop, which contains residue Ala 226, mentioned in the text.

Table 2). A small patch of sequence similarity had indeed been detected²⁵, corresponding to the connection between two homologous β-strands (the EF loop) in the corresponding immunoglobulin β-barrels. Virulence determinants in flavivirus E protein also map to the FG loop of domain III, which has a similar orientation in the flavivirus particle (Supplementary Fig. 4a). The functional data provide further support to propose a common ancestry for these domains, which are inserted within proteins that are otherwise not homologous, confirming the mosaic nature of genes coding for viral envelope proteins in general.

Particularly informative are the locations of transitional epitopes, identified in E2 (residues 200 and 202), and in E1 (residues 300, 361 and 381)²⁶, which were reported to become accessible only on exposure of alphavirus particles to certain treatments, like heat, low pH and others²⁷. Exposure of the virions to susceptible cells was also reported to result in transitional epitope accessibility, which is suggestive of an early conformational change related to cell binding²⁸. The residues in the E1 transitional epitopes map to domain III, in a region that is buried in the particle at the spike interfaces (Fig. 3c). The E2 transitional epitope is in domain B, in a region contacting the E1 fusion loop (Figs 2a and 3c). The fact that this surface becomes exposed indicates that domain B moves out, thereby opening the groove and releasing the fusion loop. This observation is in agreement with the low pH structure reported in the accompanying paper³, in which domain B is out of place and disordered in the crystal. Furthermore, the locations of the E1 transitional epitopes indicate formation of alternative inter-spike contacts, indicating a possible allosteric transmission of the ‘uncapping’ signal across the particle surface (see Supplementary Movie). A detectable expansion of the alphavirus icosahedral particle on exposure to low pH has indeed been reported²⁹.

The low pH structure of the alphavirus E2–E1 heterodimer³ shows that domain B and half of the β-ribbon connector become disordered, with domains A and C remaining in place. The missing half of the β-ribbon, termed the acid sensitive region (ASR), is a region sandwiched between domain A of E2, E3 and E1 in the CHIKV structures (Supplementary Fig. 5a). The E2–E1 interactions in this region are centred around a hydrogen bond between the side chains of E2 His 170 and E1 Ser 57 (Fig. 4 and Supplementary Fig. 2), which are conserved in all mosquito-borne alphaviruses (Supplementary Fig. 1b, c). In the immature particle, domain A and E3, which are tethered by the N linker (see Supplementary Information), clamp the β-ribbon in place until furin cleaves the tether (Fig. 4b). The CHIKV structures thus explain the resistance of immature alphavirus particles to activation by low pH.


Figure 3 | Combination with cryo-EM data.
**a**, The alphavirus \( T = 4 \) icosahedral surface glycoprotein shell. Atomic model of the 240 chikungunya E2–E1 heterodimers arranged as 80 spikes. E2 is coloured as in Fig. 1 and E1 is sandy brown for clarity. **b**, Top view of the spikes. The 9 Å resolution cryo-EM map of the Sindbis virus (SINV) virion³⁰ is represented as a grey transparent surface. The \( T = 4 \) icosahedral symmetry and quasi-symmetry axes are indicated. The black circle marks the close-up view of **d**. **c**, Side view of a spike. Red spheres mark the transitional epitopes on E2 domain B and on E1 domain III, in a region buried at interspike contacts. Regions of the map not fitted in this work (stem region, transmembrane (TM) domains, capsid and viral membrane) are indicated. **d**, Close-up of the spike top. The fusion loop (labelled) is capped by E2 domain B. The extra density extending away of domain B corresponds to an N-linked glycan in SINV (attached to N196, corresponding to Thr 197 in CHIKV, labelled). In domain A, the side chains of Asp 60 and the buried Arg 68, shown in yellow sticks and labelled, make a stabilizing salt bridge. Position 58, a virulence determinant (see Supplementary Tables 6 and 7), is marked in red.


Figure 4 | p62 maturation and low pH conformational transition.
**a**, **b**, Interactions of the ASR (see Supplementary Information) of E2 with E1 domain II, centred on the hydrogen bond (thick black line) between E2 His 170 and E1 Ser 57 (labelled). Black and white asterisks indicate the ends of visible density in the low pH structure of SINV E2–E1³. **a**, Side view. The tip of E1 domain II and the fusion loop projecting away from the paper with Trp 89 is in white. Domain A is in the background, behind the N linker. The two solid black triangles under the scale bar indicate the slab used for **b**. **b**, Clamping by E3 and domain A on the ASR. View at 90 degrees from **a**, as indicated. The N linker is highlighted with yellow dots. Cleavage by furin (red arrow) releases the constraint, allowing the dislodgement of the ASR on low pH destabilization of its contacts with E1 (movement indicated by the purple transparent arrow). Red asterisks delimitate the region that becomes disordered on furin cleavage.

This analysis is corroborated by experimental data mapping virus rescue mutations in p62 to the ASR (Supplementary Table 5).

In conclusion, this study reveals the organization of the mature and immature alphavirus surface glycoprotein complexes, the nature of the initial activating transition when exposed to low pH and the inbuilt mechanism to prevent this change from taking place prematurely. Together with the accompanying paper³, the structures show that the first step of the alphavirus fusogenic transition is removal of the domain B cap covering the fusion loop, without full dissociation of the E2–E1 heterodimer. The structures also reveal the organization of the individual immunoglobulin-like domains of E2 that are responsible for receptor interactions, carrying important determinants of virulence and mosquito vector range. These domains also carry the epitopes targeted by neutralizing antibodies, opening the way for vaccine design by immunization against alphaviruses with small recombinant proteins instead of whole particles.

**METHODS SUMMARY**

Purification, crystallization and X-ray diffraction data collection. The ectodomains of CHIKV-115 p62 and E1 joined with a glycine serine linker were expressed and secreted from stably transfected S2 cells as a strep-tagged (IBA, http://www.iba-go.com/) recombinant protein. The protein was purified by affinity chromatography and limited proteolysis was used to cleave the linker. Diffraction data from native and several heavy-atom-derivative crystals were collected at synchrotron sources (Supplementary Table 1a, b).

Structure determination and refinement. The structure was determined using a combination of molecular replacement with the available structure of alphavirus E1, experimental phasing with heavy atoms, density modification, automatic model building and multi-crystal averaging. Atomic models were refined against diffraction data from five crystal forms (Supplementary Table 1c).

EM fitting. E2–E1 heterodimers were fitted in EM maps as described in Supplementary Information. The heterodimer was initially fit as a single rigid body and then was cut into five parts as defined in Supplementary Table 3.

Full Methods and any associated references are available in the online version of the paper at www.nature.com/nature.

Received 24 May; accepted 5 October 2010.

1. Her, Z., Kam, Y. W., Lin, R. T. & Ng, L. F. Chikungunya: a bending reality. *Microbes Infect.* **11**, 1165–1176 (2009).
2. Schwartz, O. & Albert, M. L. Biology and pathogenesis of chikungunya virus. *Nature Rev. Microbiol.* **8**, 491–500 (2010).
3. Li, L., Jose, J., Xiang, Y., Kuhn, R. J. & Rossmann, M. G. Structural changes of envelope proteins during alphavirus fusion. *Nature* doi:10.1038/nature09546 (this issue).
4. Halstead, S. B. in *Pediatric Infectious Diseases* (eds Feigin, R. & Cherry, J.) 2178–2183 (Saunders, 2004).
5. Robinson, M. C. An epidemic of virus disease in southern province, Tanganyika territory, in 1952–1953 I. Clinical features. *Trans. R. Soc. Trop. Med. Hyg.* **49**, 28–32 (1955).
6. Johnson, F. Notes on Kimakonde. *Bull. Sch. Orient. Studies* **2**, 417–466 (1922).
7. Carey, D. E. Chikungunya and dengue: a case of mistaken identity? *J. Hist. Med. Allied Sci.* **26**, 243–262 (1971).
8. Schuffenecker, I. *et al.* Genome microevolution of chikungunya viruses causing the Indian Ocean outbreak. *PLoS Med.* **3**, e263 (2006).
9. Tsetsarkin, K. A., Vanlandingham, D. L., McGee, C. E. & Higgs, S. A single mutation in chikungunya virus affects vector specificity and epidemic potential. *PLoS Pathog.* **3**, e201 (2007).
10. Vazeille, M. *et al.* Two chikungunya isolates from the outbreak of La Réunion (Indian Ocean) exhibit different patterns of infection in the mosquito, *aedes albopictus*. *PLoS ONE* **2**, e1168 (2007).
11. Enserink, M. Entomology: a mosquito goes global. *Science* **320**, 864–866 (2008).
12. Akahata, W. *et al.* A virus-like particle vaccine for epidemic chikungunya virus protects nonhuman primates against infection. *Nature Med.* **16**, 334–338 (2010).
13. Salminen, A. *et al.* Membrane fusion process of Semliki Forest virus. II. Cleavage-dependent reorganization of the spike protein complex controls virus entry. *J. Cell Biol.* **116**, 349–357 (1992).
14. Ziemiecki, A., Garoff, H. & Simons, K. Formation of the Semliki Forest virus membrane glycoprotein complexes in the infected cell. *J. Gen. Virol.* **50**, 111–123 (1980).
15. Marsh, M. & Helenius, A. Virus entry into animal cells. *Adv. Virus Res.* **36**, 107–151 (1989).
16. Wahlberg, J. M., Boere, W. A. & Garoff, H. The heterodimeric association between the membrane proteins of Semliki Forest virus changes its sensitivity to low pH during virus maturation. *J. Virol.* **63**, 4991–4997 (1989).
17. Kielian, M. & Helenius, A. pH-induced alterations in the fusogenic spike protein of Semliki Forest virus. *J. Cell Biol.* **101**, 2284–2291 (1985).
18. Wahlberg, J. M., Bron, R., Wilschut, J. & Garoff, H. Membrane fusion of Semliki Forest virus involves homotrimers of the fusion protein. *J. Virol.* **66**, 7309–7318 (1992).
19. Lescar, J. *et al.* The fusion glycoprotein shell of Semliki Forest virus: an icosahedral assembly primed for fusogenic activation at endosomal pH. *Cell* **105**, 137–148 (2001).
20. Gibbons, D. L. *et al.* Conformational change and protein–protein interactions of the fusion protein of Semliki Forest virus. *Nature* **427**, 320–325 (2004).
21. Kielian, M. & Rey, F. A. Virus membrane-fusion proteins: more than one way to make a hairpin. *Nature Rev. Microbiol.* **4**, 67–76 (2006).
22. Rey, F. A. *et al.* The envelope glycoprotein from tick-borne encephalitis virus at 2 Å resolution. *Nature* **375**, 291–298 (1995).
23. Lobigs, M., Zhao, H. X. & Garoff, H. Function of Semliki Forest virus E3 peptide in virus assembly: replacement of E3 with an artificial signal peptide abolishes spike heterodimerization and surface expression of E1. *J. Virol.* **64**, 4346–4355 (1990).
24. Tsetsarkin, K. A. *et al.* Epistatic roles of E2 glycoprotein mutations in adaption of chikungunya virus to *Aedes albopictus* and *Ae. aegypti* mosquitoes. *PLoS ONE* **4**, e6835 (2009).
25. Pierro, D. J., Powers, E. L. & Olson, K. E. Genetic determinants of Sindbis virus mosquito infection are associated with a highly conserved alphavirus and flavivirus envelope sequence. *J. Virol.* **82**, 2966–2974 (2008).
26. Meyer, W.J. & Johnston, R. E. Structural rearrangement of infecting Sindbis virions at the cell surface: mapping of newly accessible epitopes. *J. Virol.* **67**, 5117–5125 (1993).
27. Meyer, W.J. *et al.* Conformational alteration of Sindbis virion glycoproteins induced by heat, reducing agents, or low pH. *J. Virol.* **66**, 3504–3513 (1992).
28. Flynn, D. C., Meyer, W. J., Mackenzie, J. M. Jr & Johnston, R. E. A conformational change in Sindbis virus glycoproteins E1 and E2 is detected at the plasma membrane as a consequence of early virus-cell interaction. *J. Virol.* **64**, 3643–3653 (1990).
29. Wu, S. R. *et al.* The dynamic envelope of a fusion class II virus. Prefusion stages of Semliki Forest virus revealed by electron cryomicroscopy. *J. Biol. Chem.* **282**, 6752–6762 (2007).
30. Mukhopadhyay, S. *et al.* Mapping the structure and function of the E1 and E2 glycoproteins in alphaviruses. *Structure* **14**, 63–73 (2006).

Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of the paper at www.nature.com/nature.

**Acknowledgements** We thank the CHIKV task force at Institut Pasteur, in particular the group of F. Tangy and the staff of platform PF8 for the CHIKV complementary DNA; A. Haouz of PF6 for crystallogenesis; the staff of synchrotron beamlines PROXIMA 1 at Soleil, ID23-eh2 at the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility and PX-I at the Swiss Light Source; M. Rossmann and Y. Sun for providing the 16 Å cryo-EM map of CHIKV virion-like particles and for sharing the coordinates and manuscript of the low pH structure of the SINVE1–E2 heterodimer before publication; and members of the F.A.R. laboratory for help during data collection. J.E.V. was supported by a Marie Curie fellowship through the European Union Research Training Network program “Intrapath”. This work was funded in part by the French ‘Agence Nationale de la Recherche’ grant DENtry in the program ‘Microbiologie, Infections et Immunité’, by Merck-Serono, by the Pediatric Dengue Vaccine Initiative and by the Institut Pasteur program PTR201 CHIKV to F.A.R..

**Author Contributions** J.E.V. made the constructs, produced and purified the protein, grew the crystals and participated in diffraction data collection; analysed the literature and prepared tables and figures. M.-C.V. carried out most of the various crystallographic refinements and prepared the figures, S.D. carried out the fitting into the cryo-EM maps of various alphavirus particles and prepared the figures, C.G.-B. and E.C. participated in optimizing protein production in large scale for crystal trials, C.V. and G.B. participated in data processing and in the structure determination. A.T. carried out specific data collection strategies to improve the signal to noise to extract anomalous signal for phasing; F.A.R. conceived the experiments and wrote the manuscript.

**Author Information** Structure factors and coordinates for the structures of the p62–E1 (crystal I0), E3–E2–E1<sub>sp</sub> (crystal MM), E3–E2–E1<sub>f</sub> (crystal M01), E3–E2–E1<sub>t</sub> (crystal M02) and Os2-E3–E2–E1<sub>t</sub> (crystal M03) complexes have been deposited in the Protein Data Bank under accession codes 3N40, 3N41, 3N42, 3N43 and 3N44, respectively. The coordinates of the molecules fitted in the cryo-EM 3D reconstructions of SINV and SFV particles were deposited under accession codes 2XFB and 2XFC, respectively. Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints. The authors declare no competing financial interests. Readers are welcome to comment on the online version of this article at www.nature.com/nature. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to F.A.R. (rey@pasteur.fr).

# METHODS

Recombinant protein production and purification. We produced the recombinant p62–E1 and E3–E2–E1 complexes from the clinical isolate 05-115 (ref. 31) in *Drosophila melanogaster* Schneider 2 (S2) cells with the construct outlined in Fig. 1a, bottom-right panel. A 19-residue linker, with sequence (GGGGS)₄ (omitting the last Ser residue) connected the C terminus of the p62 ectodomain to the N terminus of E1, thus bypassing the p62 transmembrane region and the 6K protein (Supplementary Fig. 1a). The actual construct contained amino acids 1–421 of p62 (the last one corresponding to E2 residue 361) and 1–412 of E1 (that is, all of the ectodomain, stopping right at the beginning of the transmembrane segment for both proteins; see Supplementary Fig. 1a, b). We tried a shorter construct in parallel, spanning p62 residues 1–404 (the end corresponding to E2 position 340) and E1 1–392 joined with the same linker, but we did not get diffraction-quality crystals from the resulting protein. For expression in *Drosophila* cells, we used a modified version of the pMRBiP/V5 HisA plasmid (Invitrogen) in which a double strep-tag (IBA, http://www.iba-go.com/) replaces the C-terminal His tag³². In addition, the *Drosophila* BiP signal sequence was replaced by the authentic p62 signal sequence, which retracts from the membrane to make part of the E3 domain of p62 during folding (Supplementary Fig. 1a). The secreted protein was the mature E3–E2–E1 complex, resulting from maturation of p62 by *Drosophila* furin. To produce the immature complex we introduced a mutation at the furin site, sequence 61-RQRR↓S-65 (the down arrow indicating the site of cleavage) mutated into 61-RQRES-65 to avoid furin cleavage. In the end, we found it more convenient to use the latter construct, and cleave the immature complex with trypsin at the remaining basic residues of the mutated furin site to obtain the mature E3–E2–E1 complex when needed (both structures, furin-cleaved and trypsin-cleaved, were determined in this work, and they are identical).

Stable transfectant S2 cell lines were generated with these recombinant plasmids. One-litre cultures in logarithmic phase growth (Insect Express Media) were routinely induced with 500 μM CuSO₄ to secrete protein for 1 week. The supernatants were then collected, concentrated and filtered with 0.2 μm cutoff membrane and adjusted to pH 8 with Tris buffer containing avidin at 15 μg ml⁻¹. The protein was purified by affinity chromatography using 4 ml StrepTactin columns (IBA). After loading the protein, the column was washed with 100 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, and the sample was eluted using 2.5 mM desthiobiotin. We adjusted the overall purification protocol after the initial crystallization. Screening results showed that cleavage of the artificial linker introduced in between p62 and E1 was necessary to obtain diffraction quality crystals. We found that the best crystals were obtained with protein digested with chymotrypsin, which cleaved in the region rich in aromatic residues at the end of p62 (around position 425, which corresponds to 360 in E2 numbering; Supplementary Fig. 1b), right before the linker. In our final protocol, the sample eluted from the StrepTactin column was pooled and treated with chymotrypsin (Roche) at a mass ratio of 1:5,000 enzyme:protein overnight at room temperature (20 °C). After stopping the reaction by the addition of phenylmethanesulphonyl fluoride (PMSF), the protein was desalted into 10 mM Tris pH 8.0, 10 mM NaCl (HiTrap Desalting Column 5 ml, GE Healthcare) to perform an ion exchange purification step. For this purpose, the sample was loaded onto a MonoQ 5/50 column (GE Healthcare). A salt gradient from 10 to 200 mM NaCl was applied, and the protein eluted as several overlapping peaks, which were collected in separate fractions, concentrated on a vivaspin 30K cutoff, and applied to a gel filtration Superdex 10/300 column equilibrated in 20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 100 mM NaCl. The gel filtration profile showed that the protein from the various peaks of the ion exchange chromatogram eluted at a similar volume, corresponding to a molecular weight of about 90 kD. The protein from this single peak was concentrated to about 6 mg ml⁻¹ for crystallization. Similar crystals were obtained from samples belonging to different peaks in the ion exchange chromatogram. In cases where the mature form was obtained by trypsin treatment of the mutated p62–E1 heterodimer, cleavage of the linker was done first, and after addition of PMSF to stop the chymotrypsin reaction, desalting was done to remove excess PMSF and a second step of proteolysis was carried out with trypsin (Roche) also at a mass ratio of 1:5,000 enzyme:protein overnight at room temperature before the final purification steps by ion exchange and size exclusion chromatography described earlier.

Crystallization and data collection. The crystals were grown by vapour diffusion in hanging drops at 20 °C my mixing 1 μl of protein at a concentration of 5–7 mg ml⁻¹ in 20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 100 mM NaCl with 1 μl of well solution containing 8–12% PEG4K, 100 mM NaAcetate, 100 mM HEPES pH 7.1–7.5. The original crystals were clusters of plates, and several successive seeding steps were used to obtain single crystals large enough for diffraction data collection (thin plates, 200 × 100 × 5 μm³). Monoclinic crystals were obtained initially, coded as MM form for ‘mature monoclinic’ form (see Supplementary Table 1). Reproducing these crystals was difficult, until SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis analysis together with mass spectrometry and N-terminal sequencing of the protein recovered from these crystals showed that there had been cleavage by an unknown contaminant protease in the region of the linker during the crystallization process (crystal E3–E2–E1_sp, where the ‘sp’ subscript stands for ‘spontaneous cleavage’, meaning unintended cleavage). The controlled chymotrypsin treatment outlined earlier was then introduced into the purification protocol, resulting in the growth of orthorhombic crystals. These include both the immature form obtained from the furin site mutant (crystal p62–E1, coded IO for ‘immature orthorhombic’; see Supplementary Table 1) as well as the mature forms; cleaved naturally by furin during expression for the wild type (crystal E3–E2–E1_f, code MO1, for ‘mature orthorhombic form 1’) or by trypsin treatment of the p62–E1 complex as described earlier (crystal E3–E2–E1_t, code MO2). The latter crystals were used to screen for heavy atom derivatives to obtain experimental phases. Useful phase information was recovered from osmate derivatives of the E3–E2–E1_t crystals obtained by soaking in 1 mM or in 10 mM potassium osmate (K₂OsO₄) solutions overnight. Also, a rare-earth derivative was obtained by soaking in a 50 mM holmium chloride (HoCl₃) solution for 2 h. All of the crystals were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen using 25% ethylene glycol as cryoprotectant. Diffraction data were collected at the European synchrotrons listed in Supplementary Table 1, and were processed with autoPROC (version 0.5.3; C. Vonrhein et al., unpublished) using XDS³³, POINTLESS³⁴, SCALA and TRUNCATE from the Collaborative Computational Project, No. 4 (CCP4) suite³⁵. Data collection statistics for native and heavy atom derivative crystals are presented in the Supplementary Table 1a.

Structure determination. Initial phases were obtained by molecular replacement (MR) using AMoRe³⁶ with the structure of monomeric glycoprotein E1 from SFV (PDB code 2ALA)³⁷. The model used successfully for MR was a trimmed version, lacking the regions 52–109 and 217–238 (that is, the tip of domain II). The MR solution did not produce interpretable density for the remaining p62 part. These initial phases, however, were accurate enough to locate several heavy atom sites in anomalous difference Fourier maps for the 10 mM osmate derivative to 3.7 Å (Os1-E3–E2–E1_t) (Supplementary Table 1a). Those sites, together with the phases from the partial molecular replacement model, were refined and used for phasing in SHARP³⁸. The log-likelihood gradient maps were used to complement and correct the heavy atom model.

Density modification with SOLOMON³⁹ produced electron density maps that allowed the interpretation of the missing part of E1. The density in the p62 region could be interpreted in part by BUCCANEER⁴⁰ as polyalanine fragments. This gave a more complete model covering not only most of E1 but also significant portions of p62. The improved phases obtained by combining the phase information from the intermediate partial models with the experimental phases were used to determine the heavy atom sites in the other heavy atom derivative data sets (Os2-E3–E2–E1_t and Ho-E3–E2–E1_t). Because the various data sets were not isomorphous, showing significant variation in cell dimensions (up to 8 Å in the c axis for Os1-E3–E2–E1_t) (Supplementary Table 1a), the phase information from different data sets was combined by using multi-crystal averaging in DMMULTI⁴¹. Averaging masks were based on the best partial model available at each step. Multi-crystal averaging was done using the monoclinic crystal form (map calculated with MR phases) with the orthorhombic crystal forms (using SIRAS data and phases based on the Ho-E3–E2–E1_t and p62–E1 data sets, anisotropically corrected within SHARP). The averaged map resulting from this multi-averaging step revealed the missing parts of the structure, which were built manually with the program COOT⁴². After rebuilding the tip of E1 domain II, including the fusion loop, the N-terminal part of E3 and the furin loop, the structure obtained was refined with BUSTER⁴³ against the p62–E1 data at 2.17 Å. The refined p62–E1 structure was then used in PHASER to obtain a molecular replacement solution for the other crystals. All the structures were refined by applying nine ‘TLS’ groups, describing the translation, libration and screw-rotation displacements (TLS⁴⁴) per complex. In the end, five crystal structures were refined: p62–E1 (IO), E3–E2–E1_f (MO1), E3–E2–E1_t (MO2), E3–E2–E1_sp (MM) and Os2-E3–E2–E1_t (MO3). The position and interactions in the structure of the heavy atoms used for phasing is listed in Supplementary Table 1b, and refinement statistics for the five structures are presented in Supplementary Table 1c. The superposition of the five refined models shows that there is variability at interdomain contacts (Supplementary Fig. 6a).

Fitting the crystallographic model into the cryo-EM density. The atomic model of the E2–E1 heterodimers was extracted from the p62–E1 and E3–E2–E1_sp crystal structures (codes IO and MM, respectively; Supplementary Table 1) and were fitted into the cryo-EM maps of SINV (Electron Microscopy Data Bank (EMDB) code EMD-1121; ref. 45), SFV (EMDB code EMD-1015; ref. 46) and CHIKV⁴⁷ by maximizing the correlation between structure factors calculated from the cryo-EM maps and from the atomic model with the program URO⁴⁸. The CHIKV three-dimensional reconstruction used was a 16 Å cryo-EM map provided by S. Sun and M. Rossmann. The procedure takes into account amplitude and phase information from the map and the T = 4 symmetry of the cryo-EM reconstruction. The E2–E1 heterodimers refined in the IO and MM crystals, which

adopt the most extreme conformations among the five refined structures, were fitted. The fits were done first as a single rigid body and were then improved using several rigid bodies (five for SFV and SINV, and three for CHIKV) as defined in Supplementary Table 3. The SFV cryo-EM map was rescaled by a factor of 1.04 after comparison with both CHIKV and SINV maps, to bring the viral membranes to a common radius. This step was done because fitting in the map without rescaling led to small clashes at the interspike contacts, which were released in the expanded version. A sphere of a radius of 260 Å, 250 Å and 255 Å respectively for SINV, SFV (before rescaling) and CHIKV was used to eliminate density belonging to the transmembrane regions and the nucleocapsid from the calculation, leaving only density corresponding to the alphavirus glycoprotein shell of the three different virions. The URO statistics resulting from the fitting are listed in Supplementary Table 3a, whereas Supplementary Table 3b provides the surface area buried in the various contacts in the particle between the fitted atomic models, together with the contacts observed within the E3–E2–E1 heterotrimer in the crystallographic model. The contacts on the spike are the interfaces between heterodimers within a spike and across spikes on the virion (as defined in the key in the bottom-right panel of Supplementary Fig. 1c). Supplementary Table 3c shows the root mean square deviation (r.m.s.d) after superposing the atomic models fitted independently in the four positions of the $T = 4$ icosahedral asymmetric unit of the particles, and on the different viruses. For comparison, the r.m.s.d. after superposition of the model refined in the different crystals is also provided in the same table. Supplementary Table 3d shows the Cα–Cα distance (normally 3.8 Å) resulting between the C termini and N termini of subsequent segments of the polypeptide chain that were refined in different rigid bodies, to give an idea of the distortion caused to the model (most of the breaks can be reconnected manually without major rearrangement of the polypeptide chain). Finally, Supplementary Fig. 6 shows a comparison of the inter-domain variations, reflecting inherent flexibility of the E2–E1 heterodimer. In all three panels, the Cα atoms of the first portion of domain II (closest to domain I) of E1 were superposed and displayed so that the variation in orientation of the adjacent domains of E1 and E2 can be evaluated visually. Supplementary Fig. 6a shows this superposition after refining the atomic E2–E1 atomic models against the various crystals listed in Table 1c. Supplementary Fig. 6b shows this same superposition with the model resulting from fitting the E2–E1 heterodimer as five rigid bodies into the four icosahedrally independent locations of the $T = 4$ surface lattice of the SINV cryo-EM map and superposed in the same way. Superposition of the atomic models resulting from fitting at positions P of the $T = 4$ icosahedral lattice (see definition

in Supplementary Fig. 1c, bottom-right panel) in each of the particles of the three alphaviruses used (SINV, SFV and CHIKV) is shown in Supplementary Fig. 6c. This figure shows that the adjustments between domains are similar to the variations observed in different crystal forms, highlighting a natural flexibility of the E2–E1 heterodimer, which is used to adjust to the quasi-equivalent position in the virus particle.

31. Schuffenecker, I. *et al.* Genome microevolution of chikungunya viruses causing the Indian Ocean outbreak. *PLoS Med.* **3**, e263 (2006).

32. Krey, T. *et al.* The disulfide bonds in glycoprotein E2 of hepatitis C virus reveal the tertiary organization of the molecule. *PLoS Pathog.* **6**, e1000762 (2010).

33. Kabsch, W. Integration, scaling, space-group assignment and post-refinement. *Acta Crystallogr. D* **66**, 133–144 (2010).

34. Evans, P. R. Scaling and assessment of data quality. *Acta Crystallogr. D* **62**, 72–82 (2005).

35. Collaborative Computational Project Number 4.. The CCP4 suite: programs for protein crystallography. *Acta Crystallogr. D* **50**, 760–763 (1994).

36. Navaza, J. Implementation of molecular replacement in AMoRe. *Acta Crystallogr. D* **57**, 1367–1372 (2001).

37. Roussel, A. *et al.* Structure and interactions at the viral surface of the envelope protein E1 of Semliki Forest virus. *Structure* **14**, 75–86 (2006).

38. Bricogne, G. *et al.* Generation, representation and flow of phase information in structure determination: recent developments in and around SHARP 2.0. *Acta Crystallogr. D* **59**, 2023–2030 (2003).

39. Abrahams, J. P. & Leslie, A. G. Methods used in the structure determination of bovine mitochondrial F1 ATPase. *Acta Crystallogr. D* **52**, 30–42 (1996).

40. Cowtan, K. The Buccaneer software for automated model building. 1. Tracing protein chains. *Acta Crystallogr. D* **62**, 1002–1011 (2006).

41. Cowtan, K. ‘dm’: an automated procedure for phase improvement by density modification. *Joint CCP4 ESF-EACBM Newsl. Protein Crystallogr.* **31**, 34–38, (1994).

42. Emsley, P. *et al.* Features and development of Coot. *Acta Crystallogr. D* **66**, 486–501 (2010).

43. Bricogne, G. *et al.* BUSTER version 2.9. (Global Phasing, 2010).

44. Painter, J. & Merritt, E. A. A molecular viewer for the analysis of TLS rigid-body motion in macromolecules. *Acta Crystallogr. D* **61**, 465–471 (2005).

45. Mukhopadhyay, S. *et al.* Mapping the structure and function of the E1 and E2 glycoproteins in alphaviruses. *Structure* **14**, 63–73 (2006).

46. Mancini, E.J. *et al.* Cryo-electron microscopy reveals the functional organization of an enveloped virus, Semliki Forest virus. *Mol. Cell* **5**, 255–266 (2000).

47. Akahata, W. *et al.* A virus-like particle vaccine for epidemic Chikungunya virus protects nonhuman primates against infection. *Nature Med.* **16**, 334–338 (2010).

48. Navaza, J. *et al.* On the fitting of model electron densities into EM reconstructions: a reciprocal-space formulation. *Acta Crystallogr. D* **58**, 1820–1825 (2002).
