
DOI: 10.1002/cbic.201200523

# Identification of the Verrucologen Prenyltransferase FtmPT3 by a Combination of Chemical, Bioinformatic and Biochemical Approaches

Kathrin Mundt,[a] Beate Wollinsky,[a] Han-Li Ruan,[b] Tianjiao Zhu,[c] and Shu-Ming Li*[a]

---

Previous studies showed that verrucologen is the end product of a biosynthetic gene cluster for fumitremorgin-type alkaloids in *Aspergillus fumigatus* and *Neosartorya fischeri*. In this study, we isolated fumitremorgin A from *N. fischeri*. This led to the identification of the responsible gene, *ftmPT3*, for O-prenylation of an aliphatic hydroxy group in verrucologen. This gene was found at a different location in the genome of *N. fischeri* than the identified cluster. The coding sequence of *ftmPT3* was amplified by fusion PCR and overexpressed in *Escherichia coli*. The enzyme product of the soluble His₈-FtmPT3 with verrucologen and dimethylallyl diphosphate (DMAPP) was identified unequivocally as fumitremorgin A by NMR and MS analyses. $K_{\mathrm{M}}$ values of FtmPT3 were determined for verrucologen and DMAPP at 5.7 and 61.5 μM, respectively. Average turnover number ($k_{\mathrm{cat}}$) was calculated from kinetic parameters of verrucologen and DMAPP to be 0.069 s⁻¹. FtmPT3 also accepted biosynthetic precursors of fumitremorgin A, for example, fumitremorgin B and 12,13-dihydroxyfumitremorgin C, as substrates and catalyses their prenylation.

## Introduction

Verrucologen and fumitremorgin A (Scheme 1) belong structurally to the fumitremorgin-type alkaloids, which are derived from the cyclic dipeptide brevianamide F, consisting of L-tryptophan and L-proline.[1,2] This group of substances contains a large number of natural products, such as fumitremorgins, tryprostatins, cyclotryprostatins, spirotroprostatins and verrucologen.[2–4] Most of these compounds are tremorgenic mycotoxins that induce tremors in mice due to their specific effect on the central nervous system, and several are M-phase cell cycle inhibitors.[3,5] Therefore, some of these are interesting candidates for the development of anticancer drugs. Whilst fumitremorgin C is an inhibitor of the multidrug resistance protein BCRP/ABCG2,[6] verrucologen and fumitremorgin B were shown to be genotoxic.[7] In the last decades, verrucologen was isolated from a number of fungal strains including *Aspergillus*, for example, *A. fumigatus*,[8–14] *A. clavatus*,[15] *A. caespitosus*,[16] *A. egyptiacus*,[17] *Neosartorya fischeri*,[18] and *Penicillium*,[19] as well as its telomorph *Eupenicillium* strains.[20] Several of these strains, like *A. caespitosus*,[21] *A. egyptiacus*,[17] *A. fumigatus*,[22] *N. fischeri*,[18] and *P. brasilianum*[23] also produce the mycotoxin fumitremorgin A. The characteristic structural feature of verrucologen and fumitremorgin A is the endoperoxide bridge between the two original prenyl moieties of fumitremorgin B. In comparison to verrucologen, fumitremorgin A carries an additional O-prenyl moiety (Scheme 1).

Comparative studies of the genome sequences of *A. fumigatus* Af293 and A1163, and their close relative *N. fischeri* NRRL181, led to the identification of a gene cluster for the biosynthesis of fumitremorgin-type alkaloids (Figure 1). This cluster is located on chromosome 8 in *A. fumigatus* Af293 and was proposed to comprise eight genes with an overall size of 22617 bp (bp 750209–772825 of AAHF01000014 in GenBank).[2,24] The orthologous genes of the clusters in the three strains share high sequence identities of about 68–100% on the amino acid level. Based on the results obtained from biochemical and molecular biological investigations, a putative biosynthetic pathway with verrucologen as the end product was proposed (Scheme 1).[2,25] The biosynthesis of verrucologen begins with the condensation of L-tryptophan and L-proline, which was proven by heterologous expression of the nonribosomal peptide synthetase gene *ftmPS* in *Aspergillus* and identification of the accumulated secondary metabolite brevianamide F.[26] Conversion of brevianamide F to tryprostatin B was demonstrated by in vitro investigation with the recombinant prenyltransferase FtmPT1.[24] Hydroxylation of tryprostatin B at C6 by cytochrome P450 enzyme FtmP450-1 and subsequent methylation by a putative methyltransferase FtmMT resulted in the formation of tryprostatin A. The function of

---

[a] K. Mundt, B. Wollinsky, Prof. Dr. S.-M. Li  
Philipps-Universität Marburg  
Institut für Pharmazeutische Biologie und Biotechnologie  
Deutschhausstrasse 17A, 35037 Marburg (Germany)  
E-mail: shuming.li@staff.uni-marburg.de  

[b] Prof. Dr. H.-L. Ruan  
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Faculty of Pharmacy  
Tongji Medical College and  
Hubei Key Laboratory of Natural Medicinal Chemistry and Resource Evaluation  
Hongkong Road 13, 430030, Wuhan (China)  

[c] Assoc. Prof. Dr. T. Zhu  
Ocean University of China, School of Medicine and Pharmacy  
Key Laboratory of Marine Drugs, Chinese Ministry of Education  
Yushan Road 5, 266003, Qingdao (P.R. China)  

Supporting information for this article is available on the WWW under http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/cbic.201200523.

CHEMBIOCHEM

S.-M. Li et al.

![Chemical Structures]

Scheme 1. Proposed biosynthetic pathway of fumitremorgin A in *N. fischeri* NRRL181.

A)
1 kb

![Gene Cluster Diagram A]

B)

![Gene Cluster Diagram B]

Figure 1. Gene clusters of fumitremorgin-type alkaloids in *A. fumigatus* Af293 and A1163 and *N. fischeri* NRRL181. A) Known biosynthetic cluster of verruculogen; B) DNA segment in the vicinity of *ftmPT3* in *N. fischeri* and the corresponding region in *A. fumigatus*. Genes with high sequence similarities at the amino acid level are indicated between dotted lines. Functions of genes or their orthologues (black arrows) have been proven experimentally.

FtmP450-1 was proven by gene deletion and expression experiments.[27] By using the same strategy, the functions of two other cytochrome P450 enzymes, FtmP450-2 and FtmP450-3, were attributed to the cyclisation of tryprostatin A to fumitremorgin C and its subsequent hydroxylation to yield 12,13-dihydroxyfumitremorgin C.[27] By using purified recombinant enzymes, it has been also demonstrated that the second prenyltransferase, FtmPT2, is responsible for the N-prenylation of 12,13-dihydroxyfumitremorgin C, resulting in the formation of fumitremorgin B,[28] which is then converted to verrucologen by the α-ketoglutarate-dependent dioxygenase FtmOx1.[25] FtmO belongs to ankyrin repeat proteins and contains 17 such domains.[29] Kato et al.[27] reported that inactivation of *ftmO* in *A. fumigatus* BM939 did not abolish fumitremorgin B accumulation. Using overexpressed and purified His<sub>6</sub>-FtmO, we were not able to provide any evidence on its role in the biosynthesis of fumitremorgin-type alkaloids.[29] No candidate gene from the cluster has been identified for the prenylation of verrucologen to fumitremorgin A. The reason could be that the investigated strains do not contain a gene for verrucologen prenylation, or the responsible gene is not located in the identified gene cluster, although genes for the biosynthesis of a secondary metabolite are usually clustered on the chromosome.[30]

To identify the candidate gene for the conversion of verrucologen to fumitremorgin A, we chose a strategy beginning with the identification of fumitremorgin A in fungal culture to ensure the genetic potential for its biosynthesis in the investigated strain. This approach was successfully used for the identification of the acetylaszonalenin biosynthetic gene cluster in *N. fischeri* NRRL181.[31]

### Results

#### Isolation and identification of the fumitremorgin-type alkaloids from *N. fischeri* NRRL181

To identify fumitremorgin A and its biosynthetic precursors, the fungus *N. fischeri* NRRL181 was cultivated in different media such as modified Czapex dox with yeast (mCDY) and liquid malt extract (MEP). HPLC analysis (Figure 2) showed several additional peaks in the vicinity of acetylaszonalenin.[31] Two of these were identified as verrucologen and fumitremorgin A after isolation (for detailed isolation procedures, see Supporting Information and Figure S1-1) and comparison of their MS and <sup>1</sup>H NMR data (Table 1) with those in the literature (for NMR spectrum of fumitremorgin A, see Figure S2-1).[22,32] In addition, 12,13-dihydroxyfumitremorgin C and fumitremorgin B were isolated and identified from liquid potato dextrose culture (Table 1 and Figures S1-2, S1-3, and S2-2).[28,33] These results demonstrated that *N. fischeri* NRRL181 contains the genetic potential for the conversion of verrucologen to fumitremorgin A.

Search for the candidate gene for verrucologen prenylation

Recently, a member of the dimethylallyltryptophan synthase (DMATS) superfamily[34] PAPT was identified as an O-prenyltransferase of a glucose moiety.[35] We believed, therefore, that the candidate enzyme for the conversion of verrucologen to fumitremorgin A could also share sequence similarity with DMATS enzymes. Detailed inspection of the genome sequence of *N. fischeri* revealed the presence of ten such genes.[36,37] Seven of these, or their orthologues from other fungi, have been proven in the last years to be prenyltransferases and to catalyse transfer reactions of a prenyl moiety from dimethylallyl diphosphate (DMAPP) to diverse aromatic substrates. They include two genes from the biosynthetic gene cluster of fumitremorgin-type alkaloids mentioned above (Scheme 1 and Figure 1), that is, NFIA_093720 (coding for EAW19752 = FtmPT1) and NFIA_093760 (coding for EAW19752 = FtmPT2). NFIA_055300, coding for AnaPT (EAW16181), is a member of the acetylaszonalenin gene cluster and catalyses the C3 α-prenylation of (*R*)-benzodiazepindione.[31] NFIA_094090 (EAW19789) and NFIA_074280 (EAW17508), coding for CdpNPT and CdpC3PT, respectively, are two cyclic dipeptide C3 β-prenyltransferases.[38,39] 7-DMATS (EAL84874), encoded by AFUA_7G00170A from *A. fumigatus* Af293, and its homologue EAW21275, encoded by NFIA_064390 from *N. fischeri*, are responsible for the prenylation of L-tryptophan at C7. The seventh identified prenyltransferase of the DMATS superfamily from *N. fischeri* EAW20699, encoded by NFIA_112230, was demonstrated to catalyse the prenylation of the polyketide naphthacenediones with a tetracyclic ring system.[40] This left just three putative prenyltransferase genes of the DMATS superfamily in *N. fischeri* NRRL181, that is, NFIA_093400, NFIA_043650 and NFIA_062330, with unknown function. All three genes were therefore cloned and overexpressed in *Escherichia coli*, and the purified recombinant enzymes were assayed with verrucologen in the presence of DMAPP. HPLC analysis and structure elucidation of the isolated enzyme product revealed that EAW19377, encoded by NFIA_093400, is responsible for the prenylation of verrucologen, which is the third prenyltransferase after FtmPT1 and FtmPT2 in the biosynthesis of fumitremorgin A (see below), and was therefore termed **fumitremorgin prenyltransferase 3** (FtmPT3). The recombinant EAW25546 and EAW21072, encoded by NFIA_04360 and NFIA_062330, respectively, showed no activity towards verrucologen in the presence of DMAPP (data not shown).

---

**Figure 2.** A representative HPLC chromatogram (296 nm) of culture extracts containing acetylaszonalenin, verrucologen and fumitremorgin A from *N. fischeri* NRRL181. Cultivation was carried out on solid modified Czapex dox with yeast media for two weeks at 25°C in darkness (for details, see the Supporting Information).

CHEMBIOCHEM

Table 1. ${}^{1}$H NMR data of the isolated products from enzyme assays with FtmPT3 and fungal cultures. Spectra were taken on a JEOL ECA-500 spectrometer in CDCl₃.

| Compound | Fumitremorgin B${}^{[28]}$ | Enzyme product from FtmPT3 assayed with fumitremorgin B | Fumitremorgin A${}^{[22]}$ | Fumitremorgin A isolated from *N. fischeri* NRRL 181 culture | Enzyme product from FtmPT3 assayed with verrucologen |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Pos. | $\delta_{\mathrm{H}}$, multi., $J[\mathrm{Hz}]$ | $\delta_{\mathrm{H}}$, multi., $J[\mathrm{Hz}]$ | $\delta_{\mathrm{H}}$, multi., $J[\mathrm{Hz}]$ | $\delta_{\mathrm{H}}$, multi., $J[\mathrm{Hz}]$ | $\delta_{\mathrm{H}}$, multi., $J[\mathrm{Hz}]$ |
| 3 | 5.97, dd, 10.0, 0.8 | 6.05, dd, 10.1, 0.8 | 6.13, brd | 6.12, d, 10.2 | 6.12, d, 10.3 |
| 6 | 4.45, dd, 10.0, 7.0 | 5.02, m${}^{\mathrm{b}}$ | 5.06, t | 5.07, dd, 11.1, 6.9 | 5.07, dd, 9.1, 7.1 |
| 7 | 2.48, m | 2.42, m | 1.60–2.20, m${}^{\mathrm{d}}$ | 1.60–2.20, m${}^{\mathrm{f}}$ | 1.60–2.20, m${}^{\mathrm{h}}$ |
|  | 2.10, m${}^{\mathrm{a}}$ | 2.14, m${}^{\mathrm{c}}$ | 2.40, m${}^{\mathrm{e}}$ | 2.45, m${}^{\mathrm{g}}$ | 2.40, m${}^{\mathrm{i}}$ |
| 8 | 2.10, m${}^{\mathrm{a}}$ | 2.14, m${}^{\mathrm{c}}$ | 1.60–2.20, m${}^{\mathrm{d}}$ | 1.60–2.20, m${}^{\mathrm{f}}$ | 1.60–2.20, m${}^{\mathrm{h}}$ |
|  | 1.98, m | 2.03, m | 2.40, m${}^{\mathrm{e}}$ | 2.45, m${}^{\mathrm{g}}$ | 2.40, m${}^{\mathrm{i}}$ |
| 9 | 3.64, dd, 9.0, 4.5 | 3.62, m | 3.63, m | 3.63, m | 3.62, m |
| OH-12 | 3.99, s | 4.42, s | 4.48, s | 4.46, s | 4.46, s |
| OH-13 | 4.70, d, 2.6 |  |  |  |  |
| 13 | 5.77, dd, 2.6, 0.8 | 5.57, d, 0.8 | 5.50, s | 5.49, d, 0.9 | 5.49, d, 0.9 |
| 16 | 7.85, d, 8.7 | 7.65, d, 8.7 | 7.68, d | 7.68, d, 8.7 | 7.68, d, 8.6 |
| 17 | 6.80, dd, 8.7, 2.3 | 6.80, dd, 8.7, 2.3 | 6.82, q | 6.83, dd, 8.7, 2.3 | 6.83, dd, 8.8, 2.3 |
| 19 | 6.70, d, 2.3 | 6.69, d, 2.2 | 6.59, d | 6.59, d, 2.2 | 6.59, d, 2.2 |
| 21 | 4.54, m | 4.53, d, 6.7 | 6.62, d | 6.63, d, 8.1 | 6.63, d, 8.1 |
| 22 | 5.04, td, 6.4, 1.0 | 5.02, m${}^{\mathrm{b}}$ | 5.02, brd | 5.02, dt, 8.1, 1.4 | 5.01, brd, 8.3 |
| 24 | 1.85, d, 1.0 | 1.84, s | 1.71, s | 1.71, s | 1.71, s |
| 25 | 1.70, d, 1.0 | 1.68, d, 1.3 | 1.71, s | 1.70, s | 1.71, s |
| 26 | 4.71, dm, 10.0 | 4.67, dm, 10.1 | 1.60–2.20, m${}^{\mathrm{d}}$ | 1.60–2.20, m${}^{\mathrm{f}}$ | 1.60–2.20, m${}^{\mathrm{h}}$ |
|  |  | 2.40, m${}^{\mathrm{e}}$ | 2.45, m${}^{\mathrm{g}}$ | 2.40, m${}^{\mathrm{i}}$ |  |
| 28 | 1.99, d, 1.2 | 1.97, d, 1.2 | 2.00, s | 1.99, s | 1.99, d, 1.3 |
| 29 | 1.63, d, 1.2 | 1.61, d, 1.2 | 0.99, s | 1.00, s | 1.00, s |
| 30 | 3.84, s | 3.84, s | 3.84, s | 3.84, s | 3.84, s |
| 31 | – | 4.74, dd, 10.3, 7.3 | 4.71, brq | 4.72, dd, 9.8, 7.1 | 4.72, dd, 9.9, 7.5 |
|  |  | 4.63, dd, 10.3, 7.3 | 4.67, dd, 9.8, 7.1 | 4.67, dd, 9.9, 7.5 |  |
| 32 | – | 5.61, tsept, 6.9, 1.4 | 5.60, tsept | 5.60, tsept, 6.9, 1.4 | 5.60, tsept, 6.9, 1.4 |
| 34 | – | 1.81, d, 1.2 | 1.81, s | 1.80, s | 1.81, s |
| 35 | – | 1.81, d, 1.2 | 1.81, s | 1.80, s | 1.81, s |

[a]–[i] Signals with the same letters are overlapping.

---

Identification of biosynthetic genes for fumitremorgin A on two chromosomes

NFIA_093400 (ftmPT3) was found in the genome sequence of *N. fischeri* NRRL 181 on contig 580 with a size of 521657 bp under accession number AAKE03000020.1 (http://broadinstitute.org). No homologous sequence was detected in the genome sequences of *A. fumigatus* Af293 and A1163. The aforementioned gene cluster of fumitremorgin-type alkaloids is located on chromosome 8 of *A. fumigatus* and on contig 578 with a size of 830599 bp (AAKE03000012.1) in the genome sequence of *N. fischeri* NRRL 181. A BLAST search (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) with the whole contig (AAKE03000020.1) on the nucleotide level revealed its high sequence similarity to a segment of chromosome 2 in *A. fumigatus* Af293 (Figure 1). Contigs 578 and 580 very likely contain sequences of different chromosomes.

Detailed analysis of the sequence in the vicinity of ftmPT3 in *N. fischeri* NRRL 181 and the corresponding regions in *A. fumigatus* Af293 and A1163 (Figure 1) indicated the presence of a 22382 bp fragment (bp 439000–461381 of AAKE03000020.1) containing seven putative genes and large intergenic regions between NFIA_093440 and NFIA_093360. NFIA_093440 and NFIA_093360 share, on the amino acid level, sequence identities of 89% and 93% with AFUA_2G17930 and AFUA_2G17920 in *A. fumigatus* A293, respectively. A non-coding segment of 3888 bp was found between AFUA_2G17930 and AFUA_2G17920 in *A. fumigatus* Af293. The up- and downstream genes in *N. fischeri* share sequence identities of more than 60% on the amino acid level with homologues in *A. fumigatus*, and the genes show the same orientation in the three genomes. The seven additional genes (NFIA_093430–NFIA_093370, Figure 1) show no significant sequence homology to genes of *A. fumigatus* Af293. NFIA_093380 and NFIA_093370

2586 www.chembiochem.org © 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim ChemBioChem 2012, 13, 2583–2592

were found to share sequence identities of 52% and 69% on  
the amino acid level with AFUB_048470 and AFUB_071160,  
respectively, of *A. fumigatus* A1163 at another location. It can  
be speculated that these seven genes were inserted into the  
genome of *N. fischeri* NRRL181 between NFIA_093440 and  
NFIA_093360, or that a deletion of these genes from the  
genome of *A. fumigatus* took place in evolution.  

BLAST searching revealed that NFIA_093430, with a length  
of 615 bp, showed no homology to known proteins. The deduced product of NFIA_093420 (1623 bp) shares sequence similarity with fungal type I polyketide synthetases. NFIA_093410 encodes a putative protein of 261 amino acids likely belonging to the Ser/Thr protein phosphatase superfamily. EAW19376, encoded by NFIA_093390, has a size of 528 amino acids and is likely an ankyrin repeat protein. The deduced products of NFIA_093380 (EAW19375) and NFIA_093370 (EAW19374) comprise 261 and 96 amino acids, respectively. Both products show no sequence similarity to known proteins.

### Sequence analysis of *ftmPT3*

Sequence analysis showed that *ftmPT3* comprises two exons of 1250 and 112 bp, respectively, interrupted by one intron of 62 bp. The coding sequence of *ftmPT3* was confirmed by PCR amplification of cDNA obtained from mRNA of *N. fischeri* NRRL181. An alignment with the program BLAST 2 Sequences of the deduced gene product FtmPT3 with a size of 454 amino acids clearly showed sequence similarity to other prenyltransferases of the DMATS superfamily in fungi. For example, FtmPT3 shares sequence identities of 35% with CdpC3PT from *N. fischeri* NRRL181,[38] 33% with 5-DMATS from *A. clavatus* NRRL1,[34] and 30% with FtmPT2 from *A. fumigatus* Af293.[28]

### PCR amplification and cloning of *ftmPT3*, protein overexpression and purification

The coding region of the putative prenyltransferase gene *ftmPT3* was amplified from genomic DNA of *N. fischeri* NRRL181 by two-round fusion PCR with four oligonucleotide primers (for details, see the Supporting Information).[31] The obtained PCR fragment was cloned by the cloning vector pGEM-T Easy into the expression vector pHis8 at the Sall and Xhol sites. The resulting expression construct pKM08 was transferred into *E. coli* BL21 soluble cells. Induction of gene expression was achieved by cultivation of the recombinant *E. coli* cells in lysogeny broth at 30°C for 6 h after addition of isopropyl thiogalactoside to a final concentration of 0.4 mM. One-step purification on Ni-NTA agarose resulted in a major protein band with migration clearly larger than the 45 kDa size marker on SDS-PAGE (Figure 3), as expected for His₈-FtmPT3 with a calculated mass of 52.7 kDa. A yield of 3 mg of purified protein was achieved from 1 L of bacterial culture. The molecular mass of the native recombinant His₈-FtmPT3 was determined by size-exclusion chromatography as 268 kDa, which indicated that FtmPT3 presumably acts as a pentamer.

---

**Figure 3.** Analysis of the purified FtmPT3 as a His₈-tagged fusion protein on SDS-PAGE. Recombinant proteins were separated on a 12% SDS polyacrylamide gel and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250. Lane 1: molecular mass standard; lane 2: total protein before induction; lane 3: total protein after IPTG induction, lane 4: soluble protein fraction, lane 5: flow-through fraction, lane 6: wash fraction of Ni-NTA-agarose; lane 8: purified His₈-FtmPT3.

### Enzyme activity of FtmPT3 and substrate specificity

FtmPT3 was assayed with all isolated fumitremorgin-type alkaloids in the presence of DMAPP, and the reaction mixtures were subsequently analyzed by HPLC. As shown in Figure 4, product formation was observed in the enzymatic assays with verrucologen, fumitremorgin B, and 12,13-dihydroxyfumitremorgin C. No product peak was detected in the incubation mixtures of verrucologen with heat-inactivated FtmPT3 (Figure 4C) and in the absence of the prenyl donor DMAPP (data not shown). Similar results were also obtained with fumitremorgin B and 12,13-dihydroxyfumitremorgin C as substrates (data not shown). After incubation with 20 μg of His₈-FtmPT3 per 100 μL assay at 37°C for 16 h, a product yield of 31% was calculated for verrucologen, followed by 24% for fumitremorgin B, and 10% for 12,13-dihydroxyfumitremorgin C. Fumitremorgin C, lacking the two hydroxy groups at C12 and C13, was not a substrate for FtmPT3.

Members of the DMATS superfamily usually accept aromatic amino acids such as L-tryptophan[34,41,42] and L-tyrosine,[43] as well as tryptophan-containing cyclic dipeptides as natural prenylation substrates.[24,31,38,44] They also catalyze prenylation of non-natural substrates such as flavonoids and hydroxynaphthalenes.[45,46] Therefore, we tested an acceptance of diverse aromatic substrates by FtmPT3. In total, 73 further potential substrates were assayed with FtmPT3 in the presence of DMAPP. L-Tryptophan, L-tyrosine and diverse derivatives were used as amino acids and analogues.[34,47,48] Fourteen cyclic dipeptides contain tryptophan and a second amino acid.[49] Naringenin, (+)-catechin, 1-naphthol and 1,2-dihydroxynaphthalene were used as representatives for flavonoids and hydroxynaphthalenes. No product formation was detected in these assays. This indicated that a minimal structure feature, that is, a hydroxylated cyclized indolyl diketopiperazine system, as in the case of 12,13-dihydroxyfumitremorgin C, is essential for acceptance by FtmPT3.

CHEMBIOCHEM

S.-M. Li et al.

A)

fumitremorgin A

B)

verruculogen  
fumitremorgin A

C)

verruculogen

D)

fumitremorgin B  
prenylated  
fumitremorgin B

E)

12,13-dihydroxyfumitremorgin C  
prenylated  
12,13-dihydroxyfumitremorgin C

F)

fumitremorgin C

Figure 4. HPLC analysis of fumitremorgin A (A) and incubation mixtures with FtmPT3 (B–F). Detection was carried out with a diode array detector and illustrated for absorption at 277 nm. B) verruculogen; C) verruculogen + heat-inactivated; D) fumitremorgin B; E) 12,13-dihydroxyfumitremorgin C; and F) fumitremorgin C.

FtmPT3 catalyses the regular O-prenylation of the hydroxy group at C13 of verruculogen and fumitremorgin B

For structural elucidation, the enzyme products of verruculogen, fumitremorgin B, and 12,13-dihydroxyfumitremorgin C were isolated by HPLC on preparative scales and were subjected to ${}^{1}$H NMR (Table 1, Figure S2-3 and S2-4) and HR-ESI-MS (Table 2) analyses. HR-ESI-MS data confirmed the monoprenylation of all three substrates by detection of $[M+\mathrm{Na}]^{+}$ or $[M-H]^{-}$ ions in the products, which are 68 kDa larger than those of the respective substrates. Comparison of ${}^{1}$H NMR data of verruculogen with those of its enzyme product (Table 2) revealed the presence of additional signals for a regular dimethylallyl moiety in the spectrum of the product. These signals were found at $\delta=4.72$ (dd, $J=9.9$, $7.5 \mathrm{~Hz}$, H-31), $4.67$ (dd, $J=9.9$, $7.5 \mathrm{~Hz}$, H-31), $5.60$ (tsept, $J=6.9$, $1.4 \mathrm{~Hz}$, H-32) and $1.81 \mathrm{ppm}$ (s, $6 \mathrm{H}-34$ and $35$) and proved the attachment of the dimethylallyl moiety to a hetero atom rather than to a carbon atom. The spectrum of the enzyme product with verruculogen (Figure S2-3) corresponds perfectly to that of the isolated fumitremorgin A (Figure S2-1) and in the literature.[22] Therefore, FtmPT3 catalyses the attachment of the regular prenyl moiety to the aliphatic hydroxy group of verruculogen at C13, functions as a non-aromatic O-prenyltransferase and is responsible for the last step in the biosynthesis of fumitremorgin A in *N. fischeri* (Scheme 1). Comparison of the ${}^{1}$H NMR of fumitremorgin B with that of its enzyme product with FtmPT3 and DMAPP also showed additional signals for a regular O-prenyl moiety in the product at $\delta=4.74$ (dd, $J=10.3$, $7.3 \mathrm{~Hz}$, H-31), $4.63$ (dd, $J=10.3$, $7.3 \mathrm{~Hz}$, H-31), $5.61$ (tsept, $J=6.9$, $1.4 \mathrm{~Hz}$, H-32) and $1.81 \mathrm{ppm}$ (d, $J=1.2 \mathrm{~Hz}$, $6 \mathrm{H}-34$ and $35$). In analogy to fumitremorgin A, the FtmPT3 product of fumitremorgin B carries a prenyl moiety at the hydroxy group of C13 (Table 2). Due to low yield, the FtmPT3 product of 12,13-dihydroxyfumitremorgin C could not be identified by NMR analysis. However, it can be expected that prenylation would also take place at the hydroxy group of C13.

| Table 2. HR-ESI-MS data of the isolated products |
| --- |
| Isolated enzyme products from FtmPT3 assay | Chemical formula | HR-ESI-MS data calcd | obs | Deviation (ppm) |
| fumitremorgin A | $\mathrm{C}_{32} \mathrm{H}_{41} \mathrm{~N}_{3} \mathrm{O}_{7}$ | $602.2842$ | $602.2833$ | $1.5$ |
| prenylated fumitremorgin B | $\mathrm{C}_{32} \mathrm{H}_{41} \mathrm{~N}_{3} \mathrm{O}_{5}$ | $546.2967$ | $546.3005$ | $-7.0$ |
| prenylated 12,13-dihydroxy- fumitremorgin C | $\mathrm{C}_{27} \mathrm{H}_{33} \mathrm{~N}_{3} \mathrm{O}_{5}$ | $502.2317$ | $502.2349$ | $-6.4$ |

www.chembiochem.org © 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim ChemBioChem 2012, 13, 2583–2592

Identification of the Prenyltransferase FtmPT3

CHEMBIOCHEM FULL PAPERS

Biochemical characterisation and kinetic parameters for FtmPT3

Prenyltransferases for different aromatic substrates showed distinct behaviours towards metal ions, especially Mg²⁺ or Mn²⁺.[37,50] Therefore, the enzymatic activity of FtmPT3 was determined with verrucologen and DMAPP in the presence of different metal ions at final concentrations of 5 mM. Incubation with the chelating agent EDTA or without additives were used as controls. Our results (Figure S3) showed that product formation of FtmPT3 is independent of the presence of divalent metal ions. In the incubation mixture with EDTA, a relative activity of about 94% was observed, in comparison to that of the incubation mixture without additives. In the presence of 5 mM Ca²⁺, a slight increase in enzyme activity up to 135% was detected. These results correspond well to those reported for most members of the DMATS superfamily.[34,51]

To analyse the behaviour of FtmPT3 towards its substrates, kinetic parameters including Michaelis–Menten constants (Kₘ) and turnover numbers (kₐt) were determined by Eadie–Hofstee and Hanes–Woolf plots for DMAPP, verrucologen, fumitremorgenin B and 12,13-dihydroxyfumitremorgenin C. The reactions catalysed by FtmPT3 apparently followed Michaelis–Menten kinetics (Figures S4–S7), although inhibition at 0.5 mM and 1.0 mM was observed for verrucologen and fumitremorgenin B, respectively. FtmPT3 showed relatively high affinity to its prenyl donor DMAPP with a Kₘ value of 61.5 μM. A very high affinity, with a Kₘ value of 5.7 μM, was calculated for verrucologen. The biosynthetic precursors of verrucologen were accepted with significant higher Kₘ values, that is, 32.0 μM for fumitremorgenin B and 157.5 μM for 12,13-dihydroxyfumitremorgenin C. These data are consistent with the proposed biosynthetic pathway deposited in Scheme 1. In contrast, the reaction velocities of FtmPT3 for the three substrates were found to be within a similar range, with turnover numbers from 0.035 to 0.067 s⁻¹.

Discussion

In this study, we demonstrated a successful strategy to identify secondary metabolite biosynthetic genes by a combination of chemical, bioinformatics and biochemical approaches. After isolation and identification of several metabolites of the fumitremorgen-type alkaloids, especially of fumitremorgenin A, from cultures of *N. fischeri* NRRL181, the putative prenyltransferase gene *ftmPT3* was cloned, overexpressed and characterised biochemically. By isolation and structure elucidation of the enzyme product, FtmPT3 was proven to be responsible for the transfer of a prenyl moiety from DMAPP to the hydroxy group of verrucologen at C13, resulting in the formation of fumitremorgenin A (Scheme 1). Therefore, FtmPT3 catalyses the last step in the biosynthesis of fumitremorgenin A. Interestingly, *ftmPT3* was identified on a different chromosome than that of the previously identified gene cluster for fumitremorgen-type alkaloids in *N. fischeri* and *A. fumigatus* (Figure 1), which contains genes involved in the formation of verrucologen from L-tryptophan and L-proline (Scheme 1).[2] Comparing the genome sequence of *N. fischeri* NRRL181 with those of *A. fumigatus* Af293 and

A1163 revealed that *ftmPT3* is located on an additional fragment of 22382 bp in *N. fischeri*, and no homologue gene was identified in the genome sequences of *A. fumigatus* strains. It appears that *A. fumigatus*, at least the genome reference strains Af293 and A1163, lacks the genetic potential to synthesise fumitremorgenin A. This could also be the reason why verrucologen was isolated in many *A. fumigatus* strains,[8–14] but fumitremorgenin A was isolated in a few.[22]

FtmPT3 shares significant sequence similarities with members of the DMATS superfamily.[34] As aforementioned, the sequence identities between FtmPT3 and several DMATS enzymes[28,34,38] were found to be 30–35%. Identification of FtmPT3 as an O-prenyltransferase for an aliphatic hydroxy group expands the scope of the aromatic substrates of the DMATS enzymes, which are mainly involved in the prenylation of the indole ring of diverse indole alkaloids.[4,34] Some of the previously identified members of the DMATS superfamily also catalyse prenylation of other aromatic compounds, such as tyrosine,[43] xanthones,[52] or polyketides with a tetracyclic system as natural substrates. It was recently reported that the DMATS enzyme PAPT from the fungus *Phomopsis amygdali* catalysed O-prenylation of a glucose moiety in the diterpene glucoside fusicoccin A.[35] These findings demonstrated that the members of the DMATS superfamily are involved not only in the biosynthesis of indole derivatives, which had been speculated several years ago,[51] but also in a number of different natural products. Interestingly, FtmPT3 shares only 26% sequence similarity on the amino acid level with PAPT, which is much lower than with indole prenyltransferases from this family as mentioned above. Therefore, predictions of substrate specificity and prenylation patterns of a candidate cannot be deduced from amino acid sequence similarity with known enzymes. The function of these enzymes must be proven experimentally.

### Experimental Section

#### Chemicals: 
DMAPP was prepared according to the method described for geranyl diphosphate (GPP).[53] Verrucologen was obtained from AppliChem (Darmstadt, Germany).

#### Computer-assisted sequence analysis:
The DNASIS software package (version 2.1; Hitachi Software Engineering, San Bruno, CA) and FGENESH (Softberry, Inc.; http://www.softberry.com/berry.phtml) were used for intron prediction and sequence analysis, respectively. Alignments of amino acid sequence similarities were carried out by using the program BLAST 2 Sequences (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov).

#### Bacterial strains, plasmids and culture conditions:
The cloning vector pGEM-T Easy was purchased from Promega. pHIS8 was obtained from J. Noel and was used as an expression vector in *E. coli*.[54] *E. coli* DH5α (Invitrogen) and BL21(DE3) pLysS cells (AMS Biotechnology, Abingdon, UK) were used for cloning and expression experiments, respectively. The cells were grown at 30 or 37 °C in liquid or on solid lysogeny broth with 1.5% (w/v) agar.[55] For the selection of recombinant *E. coli* strains, kanamycin (25 μg mL⁻¹) was used.

#### Cultivation of *N. fischeri* NRRL181 for RNA and DNA isolation and spore suspension:
*N. fischeri* NRRL181 was kindly provided by the Agricultural Research Service Culture Collection (Peoria, IL,

ChemBioChem 2012, 13, 2583–2592 © 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.chembiochem.org 2589

CHEMBIOCHEM

USA) and was cultivated in 300 mL Erlenmeyer flasks containing 100 mL liquid or on plates with solid potato dextrose plus sucrose medium consisting of potato dextrose (24.0 gL⁻¹), sucrose (342.3 gL⁻¹) and agar (16.0 gL⁻¹) at 30 °C in darkness. For RNA isolation, the fungus was harvested after 3 days and for DNA isolation, after 5 days.

**Cultivation of *N. fischeri* NRRL181 and extraction of secondary metabolites:** Cultivation of *N. fischeri* NRRL181 for isolation of verrucologen, fumitremorgin A and B and 12,13-dihydroxyfumitremorgin C were cultivated in different media (for details, see the Supporting Information). Each medium was inoculated with spore suspension of *N. fischeri* (100 μL) and was incubated at 25 or 37 °C for 2 weeks with or without shaking in darkness. Extraction of secondary metabolites from surface culture and culture filtrate was carried out twice with an equal volume of EtOAc. Mycelia were extracted with a mixture of MeOH and acetone (1:1). The extracts were fractionated by column chromatography on silica gel with cyclohexane/EtOAc (1:1, 3:1, 9:1). Fractions were evaporated to dryness and resolved in MeOH (800 μL) and were further purified with an Agilent 1200 HPLC as described below. The fractions after HPLC separation were evaporated to dryness resulting in high purity of fumitremorgin A (2.3 mg), verrucologen (2.2 mg), fumitremorgin B (0.5 mg) and 12,13-dihydroxyfumitremorgin C (2.2 mg) for structure elucidation by ¹H NMR (Figure S2-1 to S2-3) and ESI-MS analyses.

**DNA propagation, PCR amplification and gene cloning:** Standard procedures for DNA isolation and manipulation in *E. coli* were performed as described previously.[55] Genomic DNA of *N. fischeri* NRRL181 was isolated from 5 day-old mycelia in liquid potato dextrose plus sucrose medium. Isolation of genomic DNA was carried out by using the method described previously.[44] PCR amplification was carried out on an iCycler from BioRad (Munich, Germany). To delete the intron sequence, a two-round fusion PCR was carried out as described previously.[31] Two primers, KM_093400-1-fw (5′-ACGTC GACTT ATGAC TATCC ACCCA-3′) and KM_093400-3-rv (5′-CCGGA TGTTC AGATC ACACC TAGGG TAATA TGTTT TTAAA TTATC-3′), were used for amplification of the first exon and KM_093400–2-fw (5′-GATAA TTTAA AAACA TATTA CCCTA GGTGT GATCT TGACA AAACA TCCGG-3′) and KM_093400-4-rv (5′-ACTCG AGCTA AGCGC CAATT TTCCA-3′) for the second exon. Bold letters represent mutations inserted in comparison to the original genome sequence to give the underlined restriction sites SalI (at the start codon in KM_093400-1-fw) and XhoI (at the predicted stop codon in KM_093400-4-rv). A PCR fragment of 1379 bp was amplified by using an Expand High Fidelity Kit (Roche Diagnostics) from genomic DNA of *N. fischeri*. The obtained PCR product was cloned into pGEM-T Easy, resulting in plasmid pKM05, which was sequenced by MWG Biotech AG (Ebersberg, Germany). To create the expression construct pKM08, the plasmid pKM05 was digested with restriction enzymes SalI and XhoI. The resulting SalI-XhoI fragment of 1370 bp was isolated from agarose gel and subsequently ligated into pHIS8, which had been previously digested with SalI and XhoI.

**RNA isolation, cDNA synthesis and PCR amplification for confirmation of the coding sequence:** RNA was isolated from 3 day-old mycelia in liquid potato dextrose plus sucrose medium by using an E.Z.N.A. fungal RNA miniprep kit (Omega Bio-Tek, Norcross, GA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. cDNA was synthesised with the ProtoScript M-MuLV First Strand cDNA synthesis kit (NEB, Ipswich, USA). PCR amplification was carried out by using the primer pair KM_093400-1-fw and KM_093400-4-rv with the obtained cDNA as template. The PCR product was then cloned into pGEM-T Easy to give plasmid pKM20, which was subsequently sequenced.

Overexpression and purification of His₈-FtmPT3 protein: For gene expression, *E. coli* BL21 (DE3) pLysS cells harbouring pKM08 were cultivated in a 2000 mL flask with liquid lysogeny broth (1000 mL) supplemented with kanamycin (25 μg mL⁻¹) and grown at 37 °C, to an A₆₀₀ of 0.6. Gene expression was induced by addition of isopropyl thiogalactoside to a final concentration of 0.4 mM. The bacterial culture was cultivated for a further 6 h at 30 °C and then centrifuged to harvest the cells. The pellet was resuspended in lysis buffer (10 mM imidazole, 50 mM NaH₂PO₄, 300 mM NaCl, pH 8.0) at 2–5 mL per gram wet weight. After addition of 1 mg mL⁻¹ lysozyme and incubation on ice for 30 min, cells were sonicated six times for 10 s each at 200 W. For separation of cellular debris from the soluble protein, the lysate was centrifuged at 23 210 g for 30 min at 4 °C. One-step purification of the recombinant His₈-tagged fusion protein by affinity chromatography with Ni-NTA agarose resin (Qiagen) was carried out according to the manufacturer’s instructions. His₈-FtmPT3 was eluted with imidazole (250 mM) in NaH₂PO₄ (50 mM) and NaCl (300 mM, pH 8.0). To remove imidazole from the buffer, the protein fraction was passed through a NAP-5 column (GE Healthcare) which had been previously equilibrated with Tris-HCl (50 mM) and 15% (v/v) glycerol (pH 7.5). The same buffer was used to elute the protein and as storage buffer for the frozen protein at –80 °C.

Protein analysis and determination of molecular mass of active His₈-FtmPT3: FtmPT3 was analysed by SDS-PAGE according to the method of Laemmli[56] and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250. The molecular mass of the recombinant His₈-FtmPT3 was determined by size-exclusion chromatography on a HiLoad 16/60 Superdex 200 column (GE Healthcare, Freiburg, Germany) that had been equilibrated with Tris-HCl buffer (50 mM, pH 7.5) containing NaCl (150 mM). The column was calibrated with Blue Dextran 2000 (2000 kDa), ferritin (440 kDa), aldolase (158 kDa), conalbumin (75 kDa), carbonic anhydrase (29 kDa) and ribonuclease A (13.7 kDa; GE Healthcare). The protein was eluted with Tris-HCl buffer (50 mM, pH 7.5) containing NaCl (150 mM).

Assays for FtmPT3 activity: For quantitative determination of enzymatic activity, standard assays (100 μL) contained Tris-HCl (50 mM, pH 7.5), CaCl₂ (5 mM), aromatic substrate (1 mM), DMAPP (1 mM) and purified recombinant FtmPT3 (20 μg). After incubation at 37 °C for 16 h, the reactions were terminated by addition of MeOH (100 μL). The protein was removed by centrifugation at 17 000 g for 20 min, and enzyme products were analysed by HPLC with the method described below. Assays for isolation of the enzyme products for structural elucidation (10 mL) contained Tris-HCl (50 mM, pH 7.5), DMAPP (1 mM), aromatic substrate (1 mM), FtmPT3 (2 mg) and CaCl₂ (5 mM) and were incubated at 37 °C for 16 h.

Assays for determination of the kinetic parameters of verrucologen, fumitremorgin B and 12,13-dihydroxyfumitremorgin C contained DMAPP (2 mM), FtmPT3 (10 μg) and aromatic substrates at final concentrations of up to 2.0 mM. Assays were incubated at 37 °C for 60 min. For determination of the kinetic parameters of DMAPP, FtmPT3 (10 μg), verrucologen (1 mM), CaCl₂ (5 mM) and DMAPP at final concentrations of 0.01, 0.025, 0.05, 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 1.0 and 2.0 mM, were used. Incubation was carried out at 37 °C for 60 min.

HPLC for analysis and product isolation: The presence of secondary metabolites in the fractions of the fungal cultures was analysed by HPLC with an Agilent series 1200 on a Multospher 120 RP-18 column (250 × 4 mm, 5 μm, C + S Chromatographie Service, Langenwehe, Germany) at a flow rate of 1 mL min⁻¹. Water (solvent A) and CH₃CN (solvent B) were used as solvents. A linear gradient of

2590 www.chembiochem.org Ⓒ 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim ChemBioChem 2012, 13, 2583–2592

0–100% solvent B (v/v) in 20 min was used. The column was then washed with 100% solvent B for 5 min and equilibrated with 100% solvent A for 5 min. For purification of fumitremorgin-type alkaloids after column chromatography on silica gel, the same HPLC equipment with a Multospher 120 RP-18 column (250×10 mm, 5 μm) and different linear gradients at a flow rate of 2.5 mL min⁻¹ were used (for details, see the Supporting Information).

Incubation mixtures of enzyme products were analysed by the same HPLC equipment using a Multospher 120 RP-18 column (250×4 mm, 5 μm) and flow rate of 1 mL min⁻¹. Water (solvent A) and MeOH (solvent C) were used as solvents. For analysis of enzyme products, a linear gradient of 30–100% (v/v) solvent C in A in 30 min was used. The column was then washed with 100% solvent C for 5 min and equilibrated with 30% solvent A for 5 min.

The assays for isolation of the enzyme products were extracted with EtOAc and concentrated on a rotary evaporator at 30 °C to dryness. The residues were dissolved in MeOH and purified on an HPLC with a Multospher 120 RP-18 column (250×10 mm, 5 μm) at a flow rate of 2.5 mL min⁻¹. A linear gradient of 50–100% of solvent C in A was used for separation. The collected fractions were evaporated to dryness and subjected to MS and NMR analysis.

NMR and high resolution mass spectra: ¹H NMR spectra were recorded on a JEOL ECA-500 spectrometer. All spectra were processed by using MestReNova 5.2.2, and chemical shifts were referenced to the signal of CDCl₃ at 7.26 ppm. NMR data are given in Table 1. The isolated products were also analysed by mass spectroscopy on a Q-Trap Quantum (Applied Biosystems) by using a high-resolution electron spray ionisation (HR-ESI) mode. HR-ESI-MS data are given in Table 2.

Accession numbers: The nucleotide sequence of the genomic DNA from *N. fischeri* NRRL181 reported in this paper has been deposited to the Genbank database under accession number AAKE03000020.1.

## Acknowledgements

This project was financially supported by a grant from Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (Li844/1–3 to S.-M.L.). K.M. is financed by the LOEWE program of the State of Hessen (SynMikro to S.-M.L.).

### Keywords: DMATS superfamily · fumitremorgin A · fumitremorgin-type alkaloids · indole alkaloids · Neosartorya fischeri · O-prenyltransferases

[1] R. M. Williams, E. M. Stocking, J. F. Sanz-Cervera, Top. Curr. Chem. 2000, 209, 97–173.

[2] S.-M. Li, J. Antibiot. 2011, 64, 45–49.

[3] J. C. Frisvad, C. Rank, K. F. Nielsen, T. O. Larsen, Med. Mycol. 2009, 47, S53–S71.

[4] S.-M. Li, Nat. Prod. Rep. 2010, 27, 57–78.

[5] A. D. Borthwick, Chem. Rev. 2012, 112, 3641–3716.

[6] S. K. Rabindran, D. D. Ross, L. A. Doyle, W. Yang, L. M. Greenberger, Cancer Res. 2000, 60, 47–50.

[7] M. Sabater-Vilar, S. Nijmeijer, J. Fink-Gremmels, J. Food Prot. 2003, 66, 2123–2129.

[8] I. Kosalec, M. S. Klarić, S. Pepeljnjak, Acta Pharm. 2005, 55, 357–364.

[9] X. J. Li, Q. Zhang, A. L. Zhang, J. M. Gao, J. Agric. Food Chem. 2012, 60, 3424–3431.

[10] F. Wang, Y. Fang, T. Zhu, M. Zhang, A. Lin, Q. Gu, W. Zhu, Tetrahedron 2008, 64, 7986–7991.

[11] S. S. Afiyatullov, A. I. Kalinovskii, M. V. Pivkin, P. S. Dmitrenok, T. A. Kuznetsova, Chem. Nat. Compd. 2004, 40, 615–617.

[12] C. B. Cui, H. Kakeya, H. Osada, J. Antibiot. 1996, 49, 534–540.

[13] C. J. Land, K. Hult, R. Fuchs, S. Hagelberg, H. Lundström, Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1987, 53, 787–790.

[14] Y. Horie, M. Yamazaki, Trans. Mycol. Soc. Jpn. 1981, 22, 113–119.

[15] M. Sabater-Vilar, R. F. Maas, H. De Bosschere, R. Ducattele, J. Fink-Gremmels, Mycopathologia 2004, 158, 419–426.

[16] H. W. Schroeder, R. J. Cole, H. Hein, Jr., J. W. Kirksey, Appl. Microbiol. 1975, 29, 857–858.

[17] R. A. Samson, J. Varga, M. Meijer, J. C. Frisvad, Stud. Mycol. 2011, 69, 81–97.

[18] P. V. Nielsen, L. R. Beuchat, J. C. Frisvad, Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1988, 54, 1504–1510.

[19] R. T. Gallagher, G. C. M. Latch, Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1977, 33, 730–731.

[20] H. J. Wang, J. B. Gloer, D. T. Wicklow, P. F. Dowd, Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1995, 61, 4429–4435.

[21] S. Bräse, A. Encinas, J. Keck, C. F. Nising, Chem. Rev. 2009, 109, 3903–3990.

[22] M. Yamazaki, H. Fujimoto, T. Kawasaki, Chem. Pharm. Bull. 1980, 28, 245–254.

[23] T. P. Fill, H. B. Asenha, A. S. Marques, A. G. Ferreira, E. Rodrigues-Fo, Nat. Prod. Res. 2012, DOI: 10.1080/14786419.2012.701210.

[24] A. Grundmann, S.-M. Li, Microbiology 2005, 151, 2199–2207.

[25] N. Steffan, A. Grundmann, A. Afiyatullov, H. Ruan, S.-M. Li, Org. Biomol. Chem. 2009, 7, 4082–4087.

[26] S. Maiya, A. Grundmann, S.-M. Li, G. Turner, ChemBioChem 2006, 7, 1062–1069.

[27] N. Kato, H. Suzuki, H. Takagi, Y. Asami, H. Kakeya, M. Uramoto, T. Usui, S. Takahashi, Y. Sugimoto, H. Osada, ChemBioChem 2009, 10, 920–928.

[28] A. Grundmann, T. Kuznetsova, S. S. Afiyatullov, S.-M. Li, ChemBioChem 2008, 9, 2059–2063.

[29] M. Matuschek, Dissertation, Universität Marburg, 2012.

[30] N. P. Keller, G. Turner, J. W. Bennett, Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2005, 3, 937–947.

[31] W.-B. Yin, A. Grundmann, J. Cheng, S.-M. Li, J. Biol. Chem. 2009, 284, 100–109.

[32] N. Kato, H. Suzuki, H. Takagi, M. Uramoto, S. Takahashi, H. Osada, ChemBioChem 2011, 12, 711–714.

[33] W. R. Abraham, H. A. Arfmann, Phytochemistry 1990, 29, 1025–1026.

[34] X. Yu, Y. Liu, X. Xie, X.-D. Zheng, S.-M. Li, J. Biol. Chem. 2012, 287, 1371–1380.

[35] M. Noike, C. Liu, Y. Ono, Y. Hamano, T. Toyomasu, T. Sassa, N. Kato, T. Dairi, ChemBioChem 2012, 13, 566–573.

[36] N. Khaldi, F. T. Seifuddin, G. Turner, D. Haft, W. C. Nierman, K. H. Wolfe, N. D. Fedorova, Fungal Genet. Biol. 2010, 47, 736–741.

[37] S.-M. Li, Phytochemistry 2009, 70, 1746–1757.

[38] W.-B. Yin, X. Yu, X.-L. Xie, S.-M. Li, Org. Biomol. Chem. 2010, 8, 2430–2438.

[39] J. M. Schuller, G. Zocher, M. Liebhold, X. Xie, M. Stahl, S.-M. Li, T. Stehle, J. Mol. Biol. 2012, 422, 87–99.

[40] Y. H. Chooi, P. Wang, J. Fang, Y. Li, K. Wu, P. Wang, Y. Tang, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134, 9428–9437.

[41] A. Kremer, L. Westrich, S.-M. Li, Microbiology 2007, 153, 3409–3416.

[42] I. A. Unsöld, S.-M. Li, Microbiology 2005, 151, 1499–1505.

[43] A. Kremer, S.-M. Li, Microbiology 2010, 156, 278–286.

[44] S. Yin, X. Yu, Q. Wang, X.-Q. Liu, S.-M. Li, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2012, DOI: 10.1007s00253-012-4130-0.

[45] X. Yu, X. Xie, S.-M. Li, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2011, 92, 737–748.

[46] X. Yu, S.-M. Li, ChemBioChem 2011, 12, 2280–2283.

[47] H.-X. Zou, X. Xie, X.-D. Zheng, S.-M. Li, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2011, 89, 1443–1451.

[48] A. Kremer, S.-M. Li, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2008, 79, 951–961.

[49] B. Wollinsky, L. Ludwig, A. Hamacher, X. Yu, M. U. Kassack, S.-M. Li, Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 2012, 22, 3866–3869.

[50] L. Heide, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 2009, 13, 171–179.

[51] N. Steffan, A. Grundmann, W.-B. Yin, A. Kremer, S.-M. Li, Curr. Med. Chem. 2009, 16, 218–231.

[52] J. F. Sanchez, R. Entwistle, J. H. Hung, J. Yaegashi, S. Jain, Y. M. Chiang, C. C. Wang, B. R. Oakley, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2011, 133, 4010–4017.

CHEMBIOCHEM

[53] A. B. Woodside, Z. Huang, C. D. Poulter, *Org. Synth.* **1988**, 66, 211–215.

[54] J. M. Jez, J. L. Ferrer, M. E. Bowman, R. A. Dixon, J. P. Noel, *Biochemistry* **2000**, 39, 890–902.

[55] J. Sambrook, D. W. Russell, *Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual*, 3rd ed., Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, New York **2001**.

[56] U. K. Laemmli, *Nature* **1970**, 227, 680–685.

Received: August 13, 2012  
Published online on October 26, 2012

---

2592 www.chembiochem.org © 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim ChemBioChem **2012**, 13, 2583–2592
