
Planta (1992) 187:83–88

**Subcellular localization of luteolin glucuronides and related enzymes in rye mesophyll**

Stephan Anhalt and Gottfried Weissenböck**

Botanisches Institut der Universität zu Köln, Gyrhofstrasse 15, W–5000 Köln 41, Federal Republic of Germany

Received 30 July; accepted 3 December 1991

Abstract. Vacuoles were isolated by osmotic rupture of mesophyll protoplasts from the primary leaves of 4-d- and 7-d-old plants of rye (*Secale cereale* L.). Their content of two flavones, luteolin 7-O-[β-D-glucuronosyl-(1→2)β-D-glucuronide] (R₂) and luteolin 7-O-[β-D-glucuronosyl (1→2)β-D-glucuronide]-4′-O-β-D-glucuronide (R₁), as well as that of three specific flavone-glucuronosyltransferases involved in their biosynthesis and of a specific β-glucuronidase was determined in comparison to the parent protoplasts. The two flavonoids were found to be entirely located in the vacuolar fraction, together with 70% of the activity of UDP-glucuronate: luteolin 7-O-diglucuronide-4′-O-glucuronosyl-transferase (LDT; EC 2.4.1.), the third enzyme of the sequence of three transferases in the anabolic pathway. The activities of the first and second anabolic enzymes, UDP-glucuronate: luteolin 7-O-glucuronosyltransferase (LGT; EC 2.4.1.) and UDP-glucuronate: luteolin 7-O-glucuronide-glucuronosyltransferase (LMT; EC 2.4.1.) could not be found in the vacuolar fraction in appreciable amounts. The specific β-glucuronidase (EC 3.2.1.), catalyzing the deglucuronidation of luteolin triglucuronide to luteolin diglucuronide, was present with 90% of its activity in the digestion medium after isolation of mesophyll protoplasts, indicating an apoplastic localization of this enzyme. The data presented indicate a directed anabolic and subsequent catabolic pathway for the luteolin glucuronides in the mesophyll cells of rye primary leaves. This includes two cytosolic and a last vacuolar step of glucuronidation of luteolin, and the vacuolar storage of the luteolin triglucuronide. We propose the transport of the latter into the cell wall, after which the triglucuronide is deglucuronidated, this being the first step for further turnover.

Key words: β-Glucuronidase – Flavone-glucuronosyltransferase – Luteolin glucuronide (localization) – *Secale* (enzyme localization) – Vacuole

---

### Introduction

Primary leaves of rye (*Secale cereale* L. cv. Kustro) display a strict compartmentation of flavonoids in different tissues and a close correlation of leaf development and flavonoid metabolism. While two C-glucosyl-apigenin-O-glycosides, isovitexin 2″-O-arabinoside (R₃) and isovitexin 2″-O-galactoside (R₄) (Dellamonica et al. 1983) are accumulated in both epidermal tissues, two anthocyanins, cyanidin 3-O-glucoside (R₅) and cyanidin 3-O-gentiobioside (R₆) (Strack et al. 1982; Busch et al. 1986), and two luteolin glucuronides, luteolin 7-O-diglucuronyl-4′-O-glucuronide (R₁) and luteolin 7-O-diglucuronide (R₂) (Schulz et al. 1985), are located in the mesophyll (Schulz and Weissenböck 1986). The synthesis of the two luteolin glucuronides starting from luteolin is sequentially catalyzed by three specific UDP-glucuronate: flavone-glucuronosyltransferases (Schulz and Weissenböck 1988b) and is assumed to be channeled (as intermediates do not appear) in the cytosol of mesophyll cells. This leads to a maximum accumulation of the luteolin triglucuronide (R₁) at the fifth day of primary-leaf development; the subsequent rapid decline of this compound during further leaf development (Strack et al. 1982) is due to a specific β-glucuronidase (Schulz and Weissenböck 1987), and the product is luteolin 7-O-diglucuronide (R₂). As the small amount of accumulation of R₂ does not correspond to the rapid decline of R₁, this deglycosylation is supposedly only the first step of a turnover of this flavonoid, although no soluble degradation products could be detected.

Assuming a vacuolar localization of both flavonoids R₁ and R₂, as shown for other natural plant products

* Dedicated to Professor Ludwig Bergmann, Botanisches Institut der Universität zu Köln, on the occasion of his 65th birthday
** To whom correspondence should be addressed

Abbreviations: LDT = UDP-glucuronate: luteolin 7-O-di-glucuronide-4′-O-glucuronosyltransferase; LGT = UDP-glucuronate: luteolin 7-O-glucuronosyltransferase; LMT = UDP-glucuronate: luteolin 7-O-glucuronide-glucuronosyltransferase

(Hopp et al. 1985; Matern et al. 1986), and a cytosolic glycosidation as suggested by Matile (1984), we expected the β-glucuronidase to be vacuolar like other glycosidases (Boller and Kende 1979; Boudet et al. 1981) and the low accumulation of luteolin 7-O-diglucuronide therefore to be of catabolic origin.

### Material and methods

#### Chemicals. Luteolin was purchased from Roth, Karlsruhe, FRG. Luteolin 7-O-glucuronide, luteolin 7-O-diglucuronide and luteolin 7-O-diglucuronyl-4′-O-glucuronide were isolated from suitable plants and purified to 95–99% purity (HPLC) as described by Schulz and Weissenböck (1987). Glucose-6-phosphate, 4-nitrophenol-α-D-mannopyranoside, 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (Hepes), 2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid (Mes), diethylaminoethyl (DEAE)-Dextran and Dextran sulfate were from Sigma, Deisenhofen, FRG. NADH, NADP, UDP-glucuronate, cytochrome-c and Tris were from Boehringer, Mannheim, FRG. Dowex 1 × 2 (Cl⁻), Polyclar AT, 2-mercaptoethanol, bovine serum albumin (BSA) (fraction 5) came from Serva, Heidelberg, FRG. Ficoll-400 was purchased from Pharmacia, Freiburg, FRG, and Rohament CT and Rohament P were from Röhm, Darmstadt, FRG. Methanol was purchased from Schindler, Köln, FRG, tetrahydrofuran and acetonitrile from Baker, Deventer, Ethylenediaminetetraacetate (EDTA), sorbitol and all other solvents, acids and buffer salts were purchased from Merck, Darmstadt, FRG.

#### Media. The following buffers were used: A) 5 mM Mes-KOH pH 5.8, 0.6 M sorbitol; B) buffer A containing 1.5% (w/v) Rohament CT (cellulase) and 0.5% (w/v) Rohament P (pectinase); C) 5 mM Mes-KOH pH 5.8, 0.3 M sorbitol, 5 mM EDTA; D) 0.1 M KPi pH 7.0, 10 mM 2-mercaptoethanol.

#### Plant material. Caryopses of *Secale cereale* L. cv. Kustro were purchased from F. von Lochow Petkus, Bergen, FRG, and seedlings were grown in a phytotron as previously described (Strack et al. 1982). Primary leaves were harvested without coleoptiles according to previously determined standard lengths, 2 h after the beginning of the light period. For the determination of enzyme activities of the glucuronosyltransferases 4-d-old leaves (7.0–7.5 cm; enzyme activities at or near maxima) were collected and for investigations of the β-glucuronidase the leaves were 7 d old (14.5–15.0 cm; enzyme activity has reached its maximum).

#### Preparation of mesophyll protoplasts. Preparation of mesophyll protoplasts was similar to the method described by Schulz and Weissenböck (1988a), but with a different cellulase and pectinase. After manual peeling of the lower epidermal tissue of defined sections (4-d-old primary leaves: from 1 cm to 5 cm below tip; 7-d-old leaves: 1 cm to 8 cm below tip) of 45–60 primary leaves, the leaf sections were collected on buffer A. Buffer A was exchanged for buffer B and after vacuum infiltration for 10 min the leaf sections were incubated for 1.5 h or 2.0 h at 25°C (see Results). Protoplasts were collected by sedimentation at 50 · g for 10 min and washed four times with buffer A. The resulting protoplast suspension was free of epidermal tissue or epidermal protoplasts and vascular bundles. The protoplasts were tested for viability with 0.1% neutral red (Drawert 1968) and 0.2% Evans Blue (Gaff and Okong'o-Ogola 1971). The purity of mesophyll protoplasts was furthermore determined by their content of contaminating epidermal flavonoids (R₃, R₄), which generally was below 3% of the parental leaf sections. The protoplasts were counted in a hemocytometer (0.2 mm depth).

#### Isolation of vacuoles. Washed and sedimented mesophyll protoplasts (2.5 · 10⁶) were resuspended in 1.0 ml of buffer C (0.3 M sorbitol) and kept for 120 s with soft shaking; the suspension was restabilized by addition of 1.0 ml of buffer A (0.6 M sorbitol) containing 20% (w/v) Ficoll-400 (final concentration 10% Ficoll, 0.45 M sorbitol) and carefully mixed. A gradient was formed by successive addition of layers, each of 2.0 ml of buffer A containing 5%, 2.5% or 0% of Ficoll-400. After centrifugation at 2000 · g for 30 min the floating vacuoles could be collected from the top of the gradient and were counted in a hemocytometer (0.2 mm depth).

#### Enzyme extraction. Enzyme extraction from leaf sections in buffer D was done according to Schulz and Weissenböck (1988a). Lysis of mesophyll protoplasts and vacuoles was accomplished by freezing (liquid nitrogen) and thawing in buffer D; Dowex was added with an amount of 0.18 g, Polyclar with 0.6 g, each for 1.0 · 10⁷ protoplasts or vacuoles, and enzyme extraction was done as for the leaves. Protein content was determined according to Bradford (1976) and chlorophyll according to Bruinsma (1961).

#### Enzyme assays. The three UDP-glucuronate: flavone-glucuronosyltransferase activities (LGT, LMT, LDT) were assayed according to Schulz and Weissenböck (1988b), but without 2-mercaptoethanol in the assay for the LDT; the β-glucuronidase activity was measured according to Schulz and Weissenböck (1987). Activities were determined by measurement of the corresponding products using HPLC (column: nucleosil 100–5–C8) with a gradient from 0–50% acetonitrile in water (1% phosphoric acid) in 10 min. For the HPLC system see Knogge and Weissenböck (1986), α-Mannosidase was determined as described by Boller and Kende (1979), glucose-6-phosphate-dehydrogenase according to Bergmeyer (1979) and NADH-cytochrome-c reductase according to Hodges and Leonhard (1974).

#### Flavonoid determination. Aliquots of tissue homogenates, protoplasts and vacuoles were taken before the addition of Dowex and Polyclar and mixed with an equal volume of methanol, centrifuged and directly injected into the HPLC-column; R₁, R₂, R₃ and R₄ could be separated and determined individually in a gradient of 84% water (1% phosphoric acid), 6% methanol and 10% tetrahydrofuran to 66% water (1% phosphoric acid), 16% methanol and 18% tetrahydrofuran in 15 min.

### Results

#### Isolation and characterization of vacuoles. The method for the isolation of vacuoles from mesophyll protoplasts was developed and optimized using 7-d-old primary leaves of rye (β-glucuronidase activity per leaf reaching a maximum at this stage), and it was found to be appropriate for 4-d-old leaves (glucuronosyltransferases at or near their maxima) as well. Of the several known methods for the isolation of vacuoles (Wagner and Siegelman 1975; Saunders and Conn 1978; Boudet et al. 1981; Heck et al. 1981; Schnabl and Kottmeier 1984; Bray and Zeevaart 1985; Kreis and Reinhard 1985) the osmotic rupture of mesophyll protoplasts using a hypotonic sorbitol solution in Mes-buffer gave the best results with regard to visual purity as observed in the light microscope, vacuole yield and contamination of vacuoles by protoplasts. Vacuole yield could be improved by the addition of 5 mM EDTA to the lysis medium, and immediate restabilization by hypertonic buffer in the Ficoll gradient gave an average yield of 14% (7-d-old leaves) and 9.5% (4-d-old leaves). Staining of protoplasts and vacuoles with neutral red (final concentration 0.002%, w/v) used for recovery of vacuoles did not affect the determined enzyme activities or flavonoid content.

α-Mannosidase was detected with 104% of its activity in mesophyll vacuoles from 7-d-old leaves (Table 1) and

S. Anhalt and G. Weissenböck: Luteolin glucuronide metabolism in rye mesophyll

was therefore chosen as vacuolar marker. In 4-d-old leaves, however, only 29% of the activity of this enzyme was in the vacuoles — results similar to those of e.g. Schnabl and Kottmeier (1984) and Le-Quoc et al. (1987) — pointing to a major presence of this enzyme outside the vacuole (Table 2). Therefore, the 4-d-old vacuoles from rye were not atypical. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase as cytosolic marker with approx. 8.5% and NADH-cytochrome-c reductase as ER marker with 11% of the activity detected in vacuoles (Table 1, 2) showed a rather high degree of purity of the rye mesophyll vacuoles, comparable to former descriptions for vacuoles from other plants (Boller and Kende 1979; Hopp et al. 1985). The epidermal flavonoids R₃ and R₄, which had already served as purity marker for rye mesophyll protoplasts, could not be found in the mesophyll vacuoles at all.

luteolin glucuronides R₁ and R₂ were present at 93.5% and 112.3%, respectively, in these vacuoles (Table 3), indicating their vacuolar location.

In vacuoles derived from mesophyll protoplasts of 4-d-old primary leaves, the enzymes LGT and LMT were present at very low activities comparable to that of the cytosolic marker, which is obviously a contaminant (Table 2). However, the activity of LDT in the vacuole was 70% of the activity in whole protoplasts. In a search for the other 30%, a 100 000 · g pellet of lysed vacuoles was tested for this activity, but none could be found (data not shown). Thus, there is no evidence for this enzyme being associated with the tonoplast. A loss of enzyme activity during vacuole isolation seems to be the reason for this result. Comparable to the results obtained with 7-d-old leaves, mesophyll vacuoles from 4-d-old leaves contained 96.4% R₁ and 117.7% R₂ of the content of the parental protoplasts (Table 3), confirming the vacuolar localization of these luteolin glucuronides.

Determination of enzyme activities of the β-glucuronidase, flavone-glucuronosyltransferases and flavonoid content of vacuoles. In vacuoles derived from mesophyll protoplasts of 7-d-old primary leaves, only 4.7% of the enzyme activity of β-glucuronidase could be detected (protoplast preparation by 1.5 h incubation = 100%, Table 1). The

Detection of the β-glucuronidase. Compared with parent leaf sections, only about 25% of the β-glucuronidase activity could be recovered from mesophyll protoplasts

**Table 1. Enzyme activities of mesophyll protoplasts and vacuoles from rye primary leaves (7 d old)**

| Enzyme                     | Enzyme activity pkat · (10⁶ protoplasts)⁻¹ | Enzyme activity pkat · (10⁶ vacuoles)⁻¹ | % in vacuoles |
|----------------------------|---------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|---------------|
| β-Glucuronidase            | 0.53                                        | 0.025                                    | 4.7           |
| α-Mannosidase              | 57.6                                        | 59.8                                     | 103.8         |
| Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase | 1267.8                                      | 110.3                                    | 8.7           |
| NADH-cytochrome-c reductase | 158.3                                       | 18.5                                     | 11.7          |

**Table 2. Enzyme activities of mesophyll protoplasts and vacuoles from rye primary leaves (4 d old)**

| Enzyme                     | Enzyme activity pkat · (10⁶ protoplasts)⁻¹ | Enzyme activity pkat · (10⁶ vacuoles)⁻¹ | % in vacuoles |
|----------------------------|---------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|---------------|
| LGT                        | 23.4                                        | 1.24                                     | 5.3           |
| LMT                        | 80.5                                        | 6.60                                     | 8.2           |
| LDT                        | 27.5                                        | 19.33                                    | 70.3          |
| α-Mannosidase              | 52.4                                        | 15.10                                    | 28.8          |
| Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase | 1132.5                                      | 88.45                                    | 7.8           |
| NADH-cytochrome-c reductase | 178.3                                       | 18.19                                    | 10.2          |

**Table 3. Luteolin-7-O-diglucuronide (R₂) and luteolin-7-O-diglucuronyl-4′-O-glucuronide (R₁) contents of mesophyll protoplasts and vacuoles from rye primary leaves (4-d-old, 7-d-old)**

| Flavonoid | Plant age | Flavonoid content nmol · (10⁶ protoplasts)⁻¹ | nmol · (10⁶ vacuoles)⁻¹ | % in vacuoles |
|-----------|-----------|------------------------------------------------|--------------------------|---------------|
| R₁        | 4d        | 81.30                                           | 78.37                   | 96.4          |
|           | 7d        | 58.30                                           | 54.50                   | 93.5          |
| R₂        | 4d        | 6.32                                            | 7.06                    | 117.7         |
|           | 7d        | 19.60                                           | 22.00                   | 112.3         |
| (R₁ + R₂) | 4d        | 87.62                                           | 85.43                   | 97.5          |
|           | 7d        | 77.90                                           | 76.50                   | 98.2          |

Table 4. Effect of prolonged digestion of 7-d-old leaf sections of rye on β-glucuronidase activity of the resulting mesophyll protoplasts, and the effect on this activity of storage of the washed protoplasts

| Storage time (4°C) | β-Glucuronidase |
| --- | --- |
| of protoplasts in | (pkat · (10⁶ protoplasts)⁻¹) |
| washing buffer | after digestion |
| after digestion | of leaf sections for: |
| at 25°C | 1.5 h | 2.0 h |
| (min) |  |  |
| 0 | 0.430 | 0.052 |
| 60 | 0.415 | 0.051 |
| 120 | 0.393 | 0.048 |

chlorophyll, respectively (protein and chlorophyll recovery 90% each). However, only 20% each of total protein and total chlorophyll, derived from lysed protoplasts and apoplastic proteins, could be detected in the digestion medium after protoplasts isolation.

In conclusion, this specific distribution of the β-glucuronidase activity strongly points to an apoplastic localization of this enzyme in the mesophyll of rye primary leaves.

Discussion

Schulz and Weissenböck (1988b) proposed a channeled and cytosolic synthesis of the major flavonoid of rye mesophyll, luteolin 7-O-diglucuronyl-4'-O-glucuronide, since the three flavone-glucuronosyltransferases were highly soluble and no intermediates of the sequence could be found. The luteolin 7-O-diglucuronide, accumulating at a slow rate and in a far smaller amount than the degradation of the luteolin triglucuronide would have produced, was assumed to be the product of the β-glucuronidase-catalyzed reaction. This enzyme was expected to be vacuolar, as indicated by its acidic pH optimum of 4.3, its high solubility (Schulz and Weissenböck 1987) and the general hydrolytic character of vacuoles (Matile 1975; Butcher et al. 1977; Marty et al. 1980), especially with regard to glycosidases (Nichimura and Beevers 1978). However, our data for the β-glucuronidase are comparable to those for the coumarinyl β-glucosidase in the mesophyll of *Melilotus alba* (Oba et al. 1981), which was localized in the apoplast as well.

The localization of the β-glucuronidase in the apoplastic space maintains the view that the vacuolar luteolin diglucuronide is of anabolic origin. Additionally, the recovery of 70% of the enzyme activity of LDT in the vacuoles (4-d-old leaves) can explain the presence of both luteolin glucuronides in the vacuole and the minor accumulation.

Table 5. Recovery of activity of the β-glucuronidase in the digestion medium after isolation of protoplasts (2 h incubation) from 7-d-old primary leaves of rye. The cell-wall-digesting enzyme preparation

| Parameter | pkat β-glur · | % of control | μg protein · | % of control | μg chlorophyll · | % of control |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | (leaf section)⁻¹ |  | (leaf section)⁻¹ |  | (leaf section)⁻¹ |  |
| Control, intact | 2.050 | 100 | 564.8 | 100 | 59.6 | 100 |
| leaf section |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Medium after | 2.080 | – | 534.7 | – | 12.9 | 21.6 |
| digestion |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Protoplasts | 0.160 | 7.8 | 405.8 | 71.8 | 41.3 | 69.3 |
| (washed) |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Contamination | 0.245 | 11.9 | 423.1 | – | 0.0 | 0.0 |
| by digestion enzymes |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Digestion medium | 1.835 | 89.5 | 111.6 | 19.8 | 12.9 | 21.6 |
| minus contamination |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Recovery: protoplasts | 1.995 | 97.3 | 517.4 | 91.6 | 54.2 | 90.9 |
| plus net digestion medium |  |  |  |  |  |  |

S. Anhalt and G. Weissenböck: Luteolin glucuronide metabolism in rye mesophyll

Financial support by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft is gratefully acknowledged. We thank Professor J. Willenbrink (Köln) for critical reading of the manuscript.

### References

Bergmeyer, H.U. (1974) Methoden der enzymatischen Analyse, vol. I, pp. 673–681, Verlag Chemie, Weinheim/Bergstr., FRG

Boller, T., Kende, H. (1979) Hydrolytic enzymes in the central vacuole of plant cells. Plant Physiol. 63, 1123–1132

Boudet, A.M., Canut, H., Alibert, G. (1981) Isolation and characterization of vacuoles from *Melilotus alba* mesophyll. Plant Physiol. 68, 1354–1358

Bradford, M.M. (1976) A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein-dye-binding. Anal. Biochem. 72, 248–254

Bray, E.A., Zeevaart, J.A.D. (1985) The compartmentation of abscisic acid and β-D-glucopyranosyl abscisate in mesophyll cells. Plant Physiol. 79, 719–722

Bruinsma, J. (1961) A comment on the spectrophotometric determination of chlorophyll. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 52, 576–578

Busch, E., Strack, D., Weissenböck, G. (1986) Cyanidin 3-gentiobioside from primary leaves of rye (*Secale cereale* L.). Z. Naturforsch. 41c, 485–486

Butcher, H.C., Wagner, G.J., Siegelman, H.W. (1977) Localization of acid hydrolases in protoplasts. Plant Physiol. 59, 1098–1103

Dellamonica, G., Meurer, B., Strack, D., Weissenböck, G., Chopin, J. (1983) Two isovitexin 2″-O-glycosides from primary leaves of *Secale cereale*. Phytochemistry 22, 2627–2628

Drawert, H. (1968) Vitalfärbung und Vitalfluorochromierung pflanzlicher Zellen und Gewebe. In: Protoplastatologia, vol. II D3., pp. 427–428, Springer, Wien, Heidelberg

Gaff, D.F., Okong’O-Ogola, O. (1971) The use of non-permeating pigments for testing the survival of cells. J. Exp. Bot. 22, 756–758

Heck, U., Martinoia, E., Matile, Ph. (1981) Subcellular localization of acid proteinase in barley mesophyll protoplasts. Planta 151, 198–200

Hodges, T.K., Leonard, R.T. (1974) Purification of a plasma membrane-bound adenosine triphosphatase from plant roots. Methods Enzymol. 32, 392–406

Hopp, W., Hinderer, W., Petersen, M., Seitz, H.U. (1985) Anthocyanin-containing vacuoles isolated from protoplasts of *Daucus carota* cell cultures. In: The physiological properties of plant protoplasts, pp. 122–132, Pilet, P.E. ed. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, Tokyo

Knogge, W., Weissenböck, G. (1986) Tissue distribution of secondary phenolic biosynthesis in developing primary leaves of *Avena sativa* L. Planta 167, 196–205

Kreis, W., Reinhard, E. (1985) Rapid isolation of vacuoles from suspension-cultured *Digitalis lanata* cells. J. Plant Physiol. 121, 385–390

Le-Quoc, K., Le-Quoc, D., Pugin, A. (1987) An efficient method for plant vacuole isolation using digitonin for plasmalemma lysis. J. Plant Physiol. 126, 329–335

Marty, F., Branton, D., Leigh, R.A. (1980) Plant vacuoles. In: The biochemistry of plants, vol. 1, pp. 625–658, Stumpf, P., Conn, E.E., eds. Academic Press, New York, London

Matern, U., Reichenbach, C., Heller, W. (1986) Efficient uptake of flavonoids into parsley (*Petroselinum hortense*) vacuoles requires acylated glycosides. Planta 167, 183–189

Matile, Ph. (1975) The lytic compartment of plant cells. In: Cell biology monographs, vol. 1, pp. 1–175. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, Tokyo

Matile, Ph. (1984) Das toxische Kompartiment der Pflanzenzelle. Naturwissenschaften 71, 18–24

Nichimura, M., Beevers, H. (1978) Hydrolases in vacuoles from castor bean endosperm. Plant Physiol. 62, 44–48

Oba, K., Conn, E.E., Canut, H., Boudet, A.M. (1981) Subcellular localization of 2-(β-D-glycosyloxy)-cinnamic acids and the

related β-glucosidase in leaves of *Melilotus alba* Desr. Plant Physiol. 68, 1359–1363

Saunders, J.A., Conn, E.E. (1978) Presence of the cyanogenic glucoside dhurrin in isolated vacuoles from *Sorghum*. Plant Physiol. 61, 154–157

Schnabl, H., Kottmeier, C. (1984) Determination of malate levels during the swelling of vacuoles isolated from guard-cell protoplasts. Planta 161, 27–31

Schulz, M., Weissenböck, G. (1986) Isolation and separation of epidermal and mesophyll protoplasts from rye primary leaves – tissue specific characteristics of secondary phenolic product accumulation. Z. Naturforsch. 41c, 22–27

Schulz, M., Weissenböck, G. (1987) Partial purification and characterization of a luteolin-triglucuronide-specific β-glucuronidase from rye primary leaves (*Secale cereale*). Phytochemistry 26, 933–937

Schulz, M., Weissenböck, G. (1988a) Dynamics of the tissue-specific metabolism of luteolin glucuronides in the mesophyll of rye primary leaves (*Secale cereale*). Z. Naturforsch. 43c, 187–193

Schulz, M., Weissenböck, G. (1988b) Three specific UDP-glucuronate: flavone-glucuronosyl-transferases from primary leaves of *Secale cereale*. Phytochemistry 27, 1261–1267

Schulz, M., Strack, D., Weissenböck, G., Markham, G.R., Della Monica, G., Chopin, J. (1985) Two luteolin O-glucuronides from primary leaves of *Secale cereale*. Phytochemistry 24, 343–345

Sharma, V., Strack, D. (1985) Vacuolar localization of 1-sinapoylglucose: L-malate sinapoyltransferase in protoplasts from cotyledons of *Raphanus sativus*. Planta 163, 563–568

Strack, D., Meurer, B., Weissenböck, G. (1982) Tissue-specific kinetics of flavonoid accumulation in primary leaves of rye (*Secale cereale*). Z. Pflanzenphysiol. 108, 131–141

Wagner, G.J., Siegelman, H.W. (1975) Large-scale isolation of intact vacuoles and isolation of chloroplasts from protoplasts of mature plant tissue. Science 190, 1298–1299
