
This article was downloaded by: [University of Louisville]
On: 08 January 2015, At: 03:34
Publisher: Taylor&Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

RNA Biology
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/kbnb20

Small RNAs in the control of RpoS, CsgD, and
REVIEW

RNA Biology 11:5, 494–507; May 2014; © 2014 Landes Bioscience

# Small RNAs in the control of RpoS, CsgD, and biofilm architecture of Escherichia coli

Franziska Mika and Regine Hengge*

Institut für Biologie/Mikrobiologie; Humboldt Universität zu Berlin; Berlin, Germany

Keywords: ArcZ, biofilm, c-di-GMP, cellulose, CsgD, curli, Hfq, McsA, R
Figure 1. Morphology and physiological stratification of *E. coli* macrocolony biofilms. Macrocolonies of the curli- and cellulose-producing *E. coli* K-12 strain AR3110 (A) and the curli-producing, but cellulose-deficient original K-12 strain W3110 (C) were grown for 5 d at 28 °C on salt-free LB plates containing the amyloid dye Congo red. AR3110 is a direct derivative of W3110, in which a “domesticating” point mutation that generated a
Figure 2. Signal integration via transcription factors, sRNAs, and modulators of protein turnover in the control of RpoS and RpoS-dependent functions in *E. coli*. At least four levels of control can be distinguished, i.e., *rpoS* transcription, *rpoS* mRNA translation, RpoS ($\sigma^{S}$) activation by binding to RNAP core enzyme, and RpoS proteolysis. Numerous environmental signals are integrated at all these levels, with several key signaling systems—such as the stress alarmone (p)ppGpp or the ArcB/ArcA+R
C-limitation  
(postexponential  
growth phase)  

cAMP  
↓  
CRP  
↓  
FlhDC  
↓  
σFIa  

nutrient limitation,  
reduced growth  

ppGpp  

rpoS  
↓  
rpoS mRNA  
↓  
σS  

acute starvation  
for C/N/P sources,  
high osmolarity,  
acidification and  
many other stress  
conditions  

YegE  
↓  
YhjH — c-di-GMP — YciR  
↓  
PDEs  

A  

OmpR  
CpxR  

YaiC  
↓  
PDE
A rpoS mRNA
-97 | -120
-95 | -119
-94 | -117
AUUGC GCGUCG
U GCCCAGC
UAG
CCC UGCCUA GG-GGAA
UGCUUA GUUUUA...CGG-5'
GGG ACGGGU CCACCUU AUGAGU-CAGAA...3'
UCGGAC—CAAGGCGG
UUCCGUCAA

B ydaM mRNA
+2
-9
+3
+28
+37
-75
5
Figure 5. sRNA-knockout mutations affect macrocolony morphology of E. coli K-12. (A) Derivatives of strain W3110 with mutations in $rpoS$, $csgD$, $hfq$, and in sRNA genes affecting RpoS and/or CsgD expression were grown for 5 d at 28 °C on Congo Red agar plates, which were supplemented with 5 g/l NaCl to mildly reduce colony structure (compare with Fig. 1C), which allows to detect not only inactivating but also activating effects of mutations. (B) Der
protein adopts a doughnut-like structure with conserved Sm motifs.⁶⁰ mRNA binding via A-rich sequences occurs at the distal binding face,⁶¹⁻⁶³ whereas U-rich tails and internal U-rich stretches close to stem-loop structures of sRNAs are bound at the proximal face.⁶⁴,⁶⁵ Also, lateral sites of the Hfq hexamer are capable of sRNA binding and a recent model proposes 3′-end U binding in the proximal pore and sRNA body and seed binding to the lateral binding sites.⁶⁶ By promoting sRNA–mRNA heter
levels.⁹³ Expression of RprA is activated by the RcsC/RcsD/RcsB phosphorelay system in response to various kinds of cell envelope stress.⁴⁰,⁵⁶ In addition, RprA turnover by RNase E and RNase III is counteracted by binding to Hfq and *rpoS* mRNA and seems subject to complex control, which for instance, contributes to its regulation by osmolarity.⁴⁷,⁷⁵,⁹⁴ Also, *rpoS* translation is strongly stimulated by shift to high osmolarity.⁹
site (Fig. 4C). Since Mcas seems to be co-degraded with *csgD* mRNA, its direct role is apparently to promote degradation rather than to inhibit ribosome binding to *csgD* mRNA, although Mcas binding can interfere with 30S ribosome binding in an in vitro assay.⁹⁹,¹⁰⁵ Mcas also binds and blocks CsrA, a mRNA-binding protein that positively controls FlhDC expression and interferes with the production of the exopolysaccharide PGA.¹⁰⁷,¹⁰⁸ Via CsrA,
of the curli-dependent concentric ring morphology. Combining these sRNA mutations further exacerbates this effect and also leads to somewhat flatter and larger macrocolonies (Fig. 5B) indicating that RprA, OmrA/OmrB, and Mcas act additively in the control of CsgD and curli fiber production.

### RpoS-Dependent sRNAs: SdsR, GadY, and SraL

As many sRNAs have higher expression levels in stationary phase than in growing cells, it seemed likely that some are part of the RpoS regulon, and thereby contributeto overlapping sites on csgD mRNA), but that strong accumulation
of csgD mRNA—as e.g., during entry into stationary phase—can
also scavenge sRNAs, and thereby, indirectly affect the function
of their other target mRNAs.93 Thus, effects of dynamic changes
in sRNAs as well as distinct “hub” mRNAs can “horizontally”
propagate through the network, which can be a challenge for
the interpretation of genetic analyses, which in principle rely on
hierarchical “one-way” causal relationships.

Another point of interest for future analysis is the heterogeneous
expression of CsgD in
28. Lindenberg S, Klauck G, Pesavento C, Klauck E, Hengge R. The EAL domain protein YciR acts as a trigger enzyme in a c-di-GMP signalling cascade in *E. coli* biofilm control. EMBO J 2013; 32:2001-14; PMID: 23708798; http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2013.120

29. Ogasawara H, Yamamoto K,
73. Soper TJ, Doxzen K, Woodson SA. Major role for mRNA binding and restructuring in sRNA recruitment by Hfq. RNA 2011; 17:1544-50; PMID: 21705431; http://dx.doi.org/10.1261/rna.2767211
74. Hammerle H, Vecerek B, Resch A, Blasi U. Duplex formation between the sRNA DsrA and rpoS mRNA is not sufficient for efficient RpoS synthesis at
118. Bordeaux V, Felden B. Curli synthesis and biofilm formation in enteric bacteria are controlled by a dynamic small RNA module made up of a pseudoknot assisted by an RNA chaperone. Nucleic Acids Res 2014; 42:4682-96; PMID:24489123; http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/gku098

119. Antal M, Bordeaux V, Douchin V, Felden B. A small bacterial RNA regulates a putative ABC