
Downloaded from http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org on May 11, 2018

# PHILOSOPHICAL TRANSACTIONS B
rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org

## Insertion of proteins and lipopolysaccharide into the bacterial outer membrane

---

### Istvan Botos<sup>1</sup>, Nicholas Noinaj<sup>2</sup> and Susan K. Buchanan<sup>1</sup>

<sup>1</sup>Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA  
<sup>2</sup>Markey Center for Structural Biology, Department of Biological Sciences, and the Purdue Institute for Inflammation, Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA  

**ID:** SKB, 0000-0001-9657-7119

The bacterial outer membrane contains phospholipids in the inner leaflet and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in the outer leaflet. Both proteins and LPS must be frequently inserted into the outer membrane to preserve its integrity. The protein complex that inserts LPS into the outer membrane is called LptDE, and consists of an integral membrane protein, LptD, with a separate globular lipoprotein, LptE, inserted in the barrel lumen. The protein complex that inserts newly synthesized outer-membrane proteins (OMPs) into the outer membrane is called the BAM complex, and consists of an integral membrane protein, BamA, plus four lipoproteins, BamB, C, D and E. Recent structural and functional analyses illustrate how these two complexes insert their substrates into the outer membrane by distorting the membrane component (BamA or LptD) to directly access the lipid bilayer.

This article is part of the themed issue ‘Membrane pores: from structure and assembly, to medicine and technology’.

---

### Review

#### Cite this article:
Botos I, Noinaj N, Buchanan SK. 2017 Insertion of proteins and lipopolysaccharide into the bacterial outer membrane. *Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B* **372**: 20160224.  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2016.0224

#### Accepted: 12 October 2016

One contribution of 17 to a discussion meeting issue ‘Membrane pores: from structure and assembly, to medicine and technology’.

#### Subject Areas:
structural biology, microbiology

#### Keywords:
BAM complex, BamABCDE, outer-membrane biogenesis, LptDE, lipopolysaccharide

#### Author for correspondence:
Susan K. Buchanan  
e-mail: skbuchan@helix.nih.gov

Electronic supplementary material is available online at https://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.c.3775496.

---

### 1. Introduction

A cell envelope consisting of an inner membrane, a periplasmic space, and an outer membrane protects Gram-negative bacteria from environmental stresses and toxins. While phospholipids make up both leaflets of the inner membrane, the outer membrane is an asymmetric structure where the inner leaflet contains phospholipids, while the outer leaflet consists of lipopolysaccharides (LPS) coordinated by divalent metal ions such as calcium and magnesium. The periplasmic space separating the inner and outer membranes accommodates a layer of peptidoglycan, and has been estimated to have an average thickness of 150 Å [1].

To maintain the integrity of the outer membrane, both LPS and certain outer-membrane proteins (OMPs) are required for viability, and they must be transported across the cell envelope and positioned correctly in the outer membrane. As described in the following sections, both proteins and lipids are thought to be inserted laterally into the outer membrane through openings in the protein and LPS biogenesis machineries. Lateral migration of lipids and proteins is a common theme that has been observed before [2]. The lateral movement of proteins into a lipid bilayer has been demonstrated for the Sec translocon, where individual hydrophobic, membrane-spanning α-helices are co-translationally translocated into the inner membrane, where the final assembly of α-helical inner membrane proteins takes place [3,4]. Similarly, two β-barrel OMPs can transfer hydrophobic substrates from the lumen of the β-barrel to the outer membrane. FadL binds long-chain fatty acids first at a low-affinity (extracellular) site, and then the substrate is moved by diffusion to a high-affinity site within the barrel lumen. A conformational change occurs to release the substrate from the high-affinity site and provides free access to a ‘hole’ in the barrel wall, allowing the substrate to diffuse laterally into the bilayer through the barrel opening [5–7]. A second example is found

---

© 2017 The Author(s) Published by the Royal Society. All rights reserved.

Downloaded from http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/ on May 11, 2018

Figure 1. Transport of LPS and nascent OMPs to the outer membrane. Schematic pathways are shown for the biogenesis of β-barrel outer-membrane proteins and lipopolysaccharide in Gram-negative bacteria.

in PagP, an outer-membrane acyltransferase that protects bacteria against the host immune response by transferring a palmitate chain from a phospholipid to Lipid A. When substrate binds, His, Asp and Ser residues located on the extracellular surface of the barrel facilitate transfer of the palmitoyl group from the donor phospholipid to the Lipid A acceptor molecule [8,9].

In the outer membrane, the only essential OMPs in almost all Gram-negative bacteria are the biogenesis machineries that function to insert LPS and OMPs. This review describes recent structural and functional studies that illustrate the complex processes of protein and LPS insertion into the outer membrane.

### 2. The lipopolysaccharide-transporting complex LptDE

The biogenesis pathway for LPS has been elegantly defined in recent years [10]. LPS consists of three components: Lipid A contains the hydrophobic hydrocarbon chains that anchor the molecule in the outer membrane, while a core oligosaccharide and a variable O-antigen carbohydrate chain, containing up to 200 sugars, are hydrophilic and eventually reside on the cell surface [11]. Both the Lipid A and oligosaccharide molecules are independently synthesized in the cytoplasm and translocated to the outer leaflet of the inner membrane, where the bulky O-polysaccharide is assembled on the Lipid A core, yielding mature LPS [11].

Mature LPS is then extracted from the inner membrane, transported across the periplasmic space, and inserted into the outer membrane by the LPS transport system LptABC-DEFG [12]. All seven Lpt components are essential because they form a continuous protein network spanning the entire cell envelope (figure 1). LptB₂FG is an ABC transporter that hydrolyses ATP to provide energy for LPS extraction from the inner membrane [13], where it is transferred to LptC [14]. LptC is thought to interact with a polymer chain of LptA molecules that span the periplasmic space, with the terminal LptA linking to the periplasmic domain of LptD in the outer membrane [15]. LptA, C and D share a common fold with a hydrophobic groove that is predicted to shield Lipid A from the aqueous environment of the periplasm during transit. The Lpt components thus form a trans-envelope scaffold that drives transport of LPS by hydrolysing ATP at the inner membrane [16,17]. Once it reaches LptD, the LPS molecule is inserted into the outer membrane by the LptDE complex [18].

### 3. Description of the LptDE structures

Four LptDE structures were recently determined: the structure of full-length *Klebsiella pneumoniae* LptDE, and three N-terminally truncated LptDE core complexes from *K. pneumoniae*, *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* and *Yersinia pestis* [19]. In addition, a full-length LptDE structure was determined from *Shigella flexneri* [20] and a core complex from *Salmonella typhimurium* [21], as well as a core complex from *Escherichia coli* (PDB code 4RHB). With 26 β-strands, LptD is the largest known single-protein β-barrel. Also, it is the only protein to use a separate lipoprotein, LptE, as its 'plug' domain. Most of the globular lipoprotein LptE is nested in the barrel lumen and around a quarter of its surface is exposed to the periplasm. This architecture is preserved in

Figure 2. Structure of the *Klebsiella pneumoniae* full LptDE complex. The LptD β-barrel is shown in orange, with the N-terminal domain in green. The LptE plug is shown in blue. The first and last β-strands of the barrel are highlighted in red.

all currently determined LptDE crystal structures (figure 2 and table 1).

LptD and LptE interact very strongly with one another. These two proteins co-purify as a complex from detergent-solubilized outer membranes, they migrate as heterodimers on size exclusion columns, and are resistant to dissociation in solution, except when heated. The co-purified complex also migrates as a single band on a denaturing gel [18,35].

The dimensions of the elliptical transmembrane LptD β-barrel are around 50 × 50 × 70 Å, with three to five hydrogen bonds between the first (β1) and last (β26) strands closing the β-barrel. Strand β1 of the barrel is preceded by a periplasmic β-jellyroll domain consisting of two 11-strand β-sheets arranged in a V shape that form a hydrophobic groove, homologous to LptA. Terminal strand β26 contains a short C-terminal extension that resides in the lumen of the β-barrel. The β-barrel is also slightly tapered toward the extracellular side, with its periplasmic diameter around 10 Å larger than its extracellular diameter. LptE exhibits an α/β fold with two α-helices and five β-strands. Despite low sequence identity, individual LptE crystal structures from *Shewanella oneidensis* (PDB code 2R76), *Caulobacter crescentus* (PDB code 4KWY), *Neisseria meningitidis* (PDB code 3BF2), *Escherichia coli* (PDB code 4NHR) [25] and the solution structures from *Nitrosomonas europaea* (PDB code 2JXP) and *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* (PDB code 2N8X) [28] are almost identical to their LptDE-complexed counterparts (table 1). LptE has several distinct functions: assembly of the LptD β-barrel, stabilization of the LptDE complex by forming a plug and LPS translocation [18,25,36–38]. The N-terminus of LptE is anchored to the inner leaflet of the outer membrane by an N-acyl-S-diacylglycerylcysteine moiety that is not

visible in any of the crystal structures. While the β-barrel lumen is mainly hydrophilic, the LptE surface has both hydrophobic and hydrophilic patches, making it highly unlikely to bind the hydrophobic portion of LPS. The size of the LptDE lumen is large enough to accommodate an Ra LPS molecule (Ra LPS contains Lipid A, an inner core of oligosaccharide consisting of at least one molecule of 3-deoxy-D-manno-oct-2 ulosonic acid (KDO) linked to Lipid A, and an outer core of oligosaccharide) [20].

The available LptDE structures exhibit an identical fold, with the *Pseudomonas* LptDE structure being slightly different due to two insertion loops. These insertion loops are located in the extracellular loop region of the barrel, conferring a larger molecular surface to the *Pseudomonas* LptDE core complex [19]. The significance of the larger molecular surface of LptDE for this species is not clear, but may be related to the different O-antigen structure of *Pseudomonas* LPS.

### 4. Insertion mechanism

LPS translocation differs from protein translocation by BamA [32] or long-chain fatty acid transport by FadL [39]. The β-barrel opens only partially between strands β1 and β26, forming a lateral gate that permits diffusion of the Lipid A domain of LPS into the outer leaflet of the outer membrane. This can be attributed to the weakened hydrogen bonding interactions between strands β1 and β26 caused by two proline residues, P231 and P246 [20]. Mutation of these proline residues yields reduced viability in *in vivo* assays and closer association of the β1 and β26 strands in MD simulations [19]. Double cysteine mutations that link β1 to β26, and

| molecule                     | organism                      | resolution (Å) | PDB code | reference |
|-----------------------------|------------------------------|---------------|----------|-----------|
| LptE and LptDE complexes    |                              |               |          |           |
| LptDE core                  | *Klebsiella pneumoniae*      | 2.94          | 5IV8     | [19]      |
| LptDE full complex          | *Klebsiella pneumoniae*      | 4.37          | 5IV9     | [19]      |
| LptDE core                  | *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*     | 2.99          | 5IVA     | [19]      |
| LptDE core                  | *Yersinia pestis*            | 2.75          | 5IXM     | [19]      |
| LptDE core                  | *Salmonella enterica*        | 2.8           | 4N4R     | [21]      |
| LptDE full complex          | *Shigella flexneri*          | 2.39          | 4Q35     | [20]      |
| LptDE core                  | *Escherichia coli*           | 3.36          | 4RHB     | [22]      |
| LptE                        | *Caulobacter crescentus*     | 2.4           | 4KWY     | [23]      |
| LptE                        | *Neisseria meningitidis*     | 2.6           | 3BF2     | [24]      |
| LptE                        | *Escherichia coli*           | 2.34          | 4NHR     | [25]      |
| LptE                        | *Shewanella oneidensis*      | 2.6           | 2R76     | [26]      |
| LptE                        | *Nitrosomonas europaea*      | NMR           | 2JXP     | [27]      |
| LptE                        | *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*     | NMR           | 2N8X     | [28]      |
| BamA and BAM complexes      |                              |               |          |           |
| BamACDE                    | *Escherichia coli*           | 3.39          | 5EKQ     | [29]      |
| BamABCDE                   | *Escherichia coli*           | 2.9           | 5D00     | [30]      |
| BamACDE                    | *Escherichia coli*           | 3.5           | 5D0Q     | [30]      |
| BamABCDE                   | *Escherichia coli*           | 3.56          | 5AYW     | [31]      |
| BamA (+2POTRA)              | *Haemophilus ducreyi*        | 2.91          | 4K3C     | [32]      |
| BamA (+5POTRA)              | *Neisseria gonorrhoeae*      | 3.2           | 4K3B     | [32]      |
| BamA (+1POTRA)              | *Escherichia coli*           | 3.0           | 4C4V     | [33]      |
| BamA (barrel only)          | *Escherichia coli*           | 2.6           | 4N75     | [34]      |

[42]. The molecular mechanism by which these antibiotics interact with OMPs to disrupt the outer membrane remains to be established.

### 5. The outer-membrane protein insertion complex BamABDCE

Just as LPS is synthesized in the cytoplasm and transported across the entire cell envelope to reach the outer membrane, proteins targeted to the outer membrane make a similar journey. Proteins residing in the outer membrane adopt a β-barrel fold, with antiparallel β-strands connected to one another through extensive hydrogen bonding, where the first and last β-strands connect to form a β-barrel with a hydrophobic exterior and hydrophilic lumen. The individual strands of the β-barrel are amphipathic, with one side hydrophilic and the other side hydrophobic. Only when the β-barrel is fully formed, is a continuous hydrophobic surface presented to the lipid bilayer. This architecture presents complications for folding of nascent OMPs prior to insertion into the membrane.

Proteins destined for the outer membrane are synthesized in the cytoplasm and secreted across the inner membrane in an unfolded state by the Sec translocon [43]. In the periplasm, the nascent OMP interacts with chaperones such as SurA, Skp, FkpA and the bifunctional protease/chaperone DegP [44–46]. These protein-chaperone complexes are then targeted to the β-barrel assembly machinery (BAM) complex (figure 1). In *E. coli*, the BAM complex consists of BamA, an integral outer membrane protein with an extended periplasmic domain, and BamB, BamC, BamD and BamE, all lipoproteins anchored to the inner leaflet of the outer membrane [35,47]. The BAM complex is thought to help fold and insert the nascent protein into the outer membrane, but details of the mechanism are still being worked out. In the following sections, we discuss what is currently understood from a structural perspective and which issues remain to be resolved.

---

### 6. BamA catalyses insertion of nascent outer-membrane proteins into the outer membrane

Structures were determined for full-length BamA from *Neisseria gonorrhoeae* and an N-terminally truncated BamA from *Haemophilus ducreyi* (figure 3) [32]. In these organisms as well as in *E. coli* [33,34], the structure consists of five periplasmic polypeptide translocation-associated (POTRA) domains followed by a membrane-inserted β-barrel with 16 antiparallel β-strands. Studies of POTRA-barrel chimeras have demonstrated that the β-barrel domain is often interchangeable, while the POTRA domains show more species specificity [48]. The β-barrel is a very unusual OMP, displaying a reduced hydrophobic thickness where strands β1 and β16 are joined compared with the opposite side of the β-barrel. This feature was observed by using the crystal structures to measure the distances between aromatic residues on the outside of the barrel [32], by molecular dynamics simulations that showed a reduced distance between lipid head groups and a corresponding increased disorder of surrounding lipid chains [32], and by direct observation using electron microscopy of lipid vesicles with BamA inserted [49]. The hydrophobic thickness mismatch between BamA and the outer membrane appears to locally thin and disorder

---

**Figure 3. Structure of *Neisseria gonorrhoeae* and *Haemophilus ducreyi* BamA.** The *Neisseria* structure has five POTRA domains (P1 to P5), while in the *Haemophilus* only two are visible. The different number of hydrogen bonds (yellow dashed lines) between strands β1 and β16 (red) are shown in the insets.

Figure 4. Structure of the BAM complex. This view was generated by merging the crystal structures of BamACDE (PDB code 5EKQ) and BamAB (4PKI). BamA is shown in cyan, the POTRA domains in different shades of teal, BamB in grey, BamC in green, BamD in gold and BamE in violet. The first and last β-strands of the BamA barrel are highlighted in red.

β-augmentation, or strand pairing, with other β-strands, such as those of the nascent OMP. This could potentially allow for the coordinated folding and insertion of a nascent OMP by directly budding it off from the BamA opening [32]. The opening also creates a pathway from the lumen of the β-barrel directly into the lipid bilayer, although exactly what this interface looks like is currently unknown. Located just above the barrel opening is an 'exit pore' defined primarily by alternating movements of extracellular loop 1 [51]. The exit pore may facilitate transport of extracellular loops (which can be as long as 100 residues [52]) of the nascent OMP to the cell surface. These features have been found in all BamA structures solved to date (table 1), and may play a role in folding nascent OMPs or inserting them into the outer membrane, or perhaps both.

7. Structures of the BAM complex reveal further BamA movements

By 2011, the structures of all of the lipoproteins, BamB, BamC, BamD and BamE, had been determined and a model for assembly of the BAM complex was formulated (for a review, see [53]). Recent structures of BamB and BamD bound to a periplasmic fragment of BamA, as well as an earlier structure of a BamCD complex, confirmed the model and helped to visualize component assembly [54–56]. It has become clear that the BamA POTRA domains can exhibit flexibility in the absence of other BAM components [57–59] but they probably interact with the

periplasmic surface of the outer membrane *in vivo*, modulating their flexibility [60]. BamD plays an important role in outer-membrane protein biogenesis [61,62], while the trapping of a folding intermediate suggested that BamA and BamD work together to catalyse folding [63].

Although the model correctly predicted many of the interactions made by individual lipoproteins with the BamA POTRA domains, and the recent structural and functional studies illustrated a number of important features, we could not have anticipated the unusual conformational changes in BamA occurring upon BAM complex formation.

In 2010, an intact BAM complex was prepared by making sub-complexes containing BamAB and BamCDE, and then reconstituting the BAM complex into lipid vesicles. Upon addition of the chaperone SurA and an unfolded OMP substrate (OmpT), the BAM complex was able to fold and insert the OMP substrate into vesicles without any additional protein components or energy requirement [64]. This *in vitro* system was recently improved upon by expressing all five Bam components from a single expression vector, resulting in a BAM complex with markedly increased folding activity [65]. The improved method for producing an intact BAM complex assisted three groups in determining crystal structures of *E. coli* BamACDE and BamABCDE (table 1 and figure 4) [29–31].

Purification of the BAM complex resulted in stoichiometric amounts of BamA, BamB, BamC, BamD and BamE after size exclusion chromatography [29], but BamB dissociates or is degraded during crystallization. Of the four

and β15. The movement changes the angle of the affected β-strands in the membrane, opens the exit pore through conformational changes in extracellular loops 1–3, and causes a large rearrangement of the β-barrel opening to the lipid bilayer (electronic supplementary material, movie S1). Whether BamB is actively modulating these conformational changes, and exactly how these movements assist folding and insertion of nascent OMPs, is unknown.

There are many questions remaining in the BAM field, and the structures of Bam components and BAM complexes provide a framework for future experiments. Among the unresolved issues are the following: how folded or unfolded is the substrate OMP when bound to chaperones? How many copies of a chaperone bind to a single OMP? As different classes of OMPs display dependencies on different chaperones [45], does that indicate that there are multiple folding/insertion mechanisms facilitated by the BAM complex? What does the interaction between a chaperone-OMP complex and the BAM complex look like? What exactly is the BAM complex doing: does it actively fold OMPs, or simply facilitate insertion by local destabilization of the outer membrane, or does it participate in both folding and insertion? How similar is biogenesis of OMPs in mitochondria and chloroplasts [66,67]?

### Conclusion

We have reviewed two major players of outer-membrane biogenesis: the LPS and the bacterial assembly machineries. Both complexes are essential for the integrity and survival of Gram-negative bacteria, and while both translocate basic building blocks of the bacterial outer membrane, their mechanism of action is markedly different. A series of crystal structures complemented by mutagenesis and molecular dynamics simulations offer a glimpse into the intricate mechanisms of these highly complex molecular machines. Further experiments are needed to fully understand the details of these processes and permit the design of molecules that target specific parts of the BAM and Lpt pathways, with potential therapeutic benefits.

#### Note added in proof

A recent cryo-EM structure of the BAM complex contains all five Bam proteins and shows a closed BamA barrel (Iadanza *et al.*, Nat. Comm. 7:12865 (2016)).

#### Authors’ contributions

I.B., N.N. and S.K.B. wrote the manuscript and approved the final version.

#### Competing interests

We declare we have no competing interests.

#### Funding

I.B. and S.K.B. are supported by the Intramural Research Program of the National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (ZIA DK036139-10 LMB). N.N. is supported by the Department of Biological Sciences at Purdue University and by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (1K22AI113078-01).

### References

1. Beveridge TJ. 1999 Structures of gram-negative cell walls and their derived membrane vesicles. J. Bacteriol. **181**, 4725–4733.
2. Bishop RE. 2014 Structural biology: Lipopolysaccharide rolls out the barrel. Nature **511**, 37–38. (doi:10.1038/nature13508)
3. Li L, Park E, Ling J, Ingram J, Ploegh H, Rapoport TA. 2016 Crystal structure of a substrate-engaged SecY protein-translocation

channel. Nature 531, 395–399. (doi:10.1038/nature17163)

4. Park E, Menetret JF, Gumbart JC, Ludtke SJ, Li W, Whynot A, Rapoport TA, Akey CW. 2014 Structure of the SecY channel during initiation of protein translocation. Nature 506, 102–106. (doi:10.1038/nature12720)

5. Hearn EM, Patel DR, Lepore BW, Indic M, van den Berg B. 2009 Transmembrane passage of hydrophobic compounds through a protein channel wall. Nature 458, 367–370. (doi:10.1038/nature07678)

6. van den Berg B. 2010 Going forward laterally: transmembrane passage of hydrophobic molecules through protein channel walls. ChemBioChem 11, 1339–1343. (doi:10.1002/cbic.201000105)

7. van den Berg B. 2010 Bacterial cleanup: lateral diffusion of hydrophobic molecules through protein channel walls. Biomol. Concepts 1, 263–270. (doi:10.1515/bmc.2010.024)

8. Ahn VE, Lo EI, Engel CK, Chen L, Hwang PM, Kay LE, Bishop RE, Prive GG. 2004 A hydrocarbon ruler measures palmitate in the enzymatic acylation of endotoxin. EMBO J. 23, 2931–2941. (doi:10.1038/sj.emboj.7600320)

9. Khan MA, Bishop RE. 2009 Molecular mechanism for lateral lipid diffusion between the outer membrane external leaflet and a beta-barrel hydrocarbon ruler. Biochemistry 48, 9745–9756. (doi:10.1021/bi9013566)

10. Okuda S, Sherman DJ, Silhavy TJ, Ruiz N, Kahne D. 2016 Lipopolysaccharide transport and assembly at the outer membrane: the PEZ model. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 14, 337–345. (doi:10.1038/nrmicro.2016.25)

11. Whitfield C, Trent MS. 2014 Biosynthesis and export of bacterial lipopolysaccharides. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 83, 99–128. (doi:10.1146/annurev-biochem-060713-035600)

12. Villa R et al. 2013 The Escherichia coli Lpt transenvelope protein complex for lipopolysaccharide export is assembled via conserved structurally homologous domains. J. Bacteriol. 195, 1100–1108. (doi:10.1128/JB.02057-12)

13. Narita S, Tokuda H. 2009 Biochemical characterization of an ABC transporter LptBFGC complex required for the outer membrane sorting of lipopolysaccharides. FEBS Lett. 583, 2160–2164. (doi:10.1016/j.febslet.2009.05.051)

14. Sperandeo P, Villa R, Martorana AM, Samalikova M, Grandori R, Deho G, Polissi A. 2011 New insights into the Lpt machinery for lipopolysaccharide transport to the cell surface: LptA-LptC interaction and LptA stability as sensors of a properly assembled transenvelope complex. J. Bacteriol. 193, 1042–1053. (doi:10.1128/JB.01037-10)

15. Bowyer A, Baardsnes J, Ajamian E, Zhang L, Cygler M. 2011 Characterization of interactions between LPS transport proteins of the Lpt system. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 404, 1093–1098. (doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.12.121)

16. Okuda S, Freinkman E, Kahne D. 2012 Cytoplasmic ATP hydrolysis powers transport of lipopolysaccharide

across the periplasm in *E. coli*. Science 338, 1214–1217. (doi:10.1126/science.1228984)

17. Sherman DJ, Lazarus MB, Murphy L, Liu C, Walker S, Ruiz N, Kahne D. 2014 Decoupling catalytic activity from biological function of the ATPase that powers lipopolysaccharide transport. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, 4982–4987. (doi:10.1073/pnas.1323516111)

18. Chng SS, Ruiz N, Chimalakonda G, Silhavy TJ, Kahne D. 2010 Characterization of the two-protein complex in *Escherichia coli* responsible for lipopolysaccharide assembly at the outer membrane. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, 5363–5368. (doi:10.1073/pnas.0912872107)

19. Botos I, Majdalani N, Mayclin SJ, McCarthy JG, Lundquist K, Wojtowicz D, Barnard TJ, Gumbart JC, Buchanan SK. 2016 Structural and functional characterization of the LPS transporter LptDE from Gram-negative pathogens. Structure 24, 965–976. (doi:10.1016/j.str.2016.03.026)

20. Qiao S, Luo Q, Zhao Y, Zhang XC, Huang Y. 2014 Structural basis for lipopolysaccharide insertion in the bacterial outer membrane. Nature 511, 108–111. (doi:10.1038/nature13484)

21. Dong H et al. 2014 Structural basis for outer membrane lipopolysaccharide insertion. Nature 511, 52–56. (doi:10.1038/nature13464)

22. Malojcic G, Garner RA, Kahne D. 2014 Crystal structure of the lipopolysaccharide assembly complex LptD-LptE from the *Escherichia coli* outer membrane. PDB code 4RHB.

23. Genomics JCFs. 2013 Crystal structure of a putative lipoprotein (CC_3750) from Caulobacter crescentus CB15 at 2.40 Å resolution. PDB code 4KWY.

24. Vorobiev SM et al. 2007 Crystal structure of the A1KSW9_NEIMF protein from Neisseria meningitidis. Northeast Structural Genomics Consortium target MR36a. PDB code 3BF2.

25. Malojcic G, Andres D, Grabowicz M, George AH, Ruiz N, Silhavy TJ, Kahne D. 2014 LptE binds to and alters the physical state of LPS to catalyze its assembly at the cell surface. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, 9467–9472. (doi:10.1073/pnas.1402746111)

26. Forouhar F et al. 2007 Crystal structure of the rare lipoprotein B (SO_1173) from Shewanella oneidensis, Northeast Structural Genomics Consortium Target SoR91A. PDB code 2R76.

27. Rossi P et al. 2007 Solution NMR structure of uncharacterized lipoprotein B from Nitrosomonas europaea. Northeast Structural Genomics target NeR45A. PDB code 2JXP.

28. Moehle K, Kocherla H, Bacsa B, Jurt S, Zerbe K, Robinson JA, Zerbe O. 2016 Solution structure and dynamics of LptE from *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Biochemistry 55, 2936–2943. (doi:10.1021/acs.biochem.6b00313)

29. Bakelar J, Buchanan SK, Noinaj N. 2016 The structure of the beta-barrel assembly machinery complex. Science 351, 180–186. (doi:10.1126/science.aad3460)

30. Gu Y et al. 2016 Structural basis of outer membrane protein insertion by the BAM complex. Nature 531, 64–69. (doi:10.1038/nature17199)

31. Han L et al. 2016 Structure of the BAM complex and its implications for biogenesis of outer-membrane proteins. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 23, 192–196. (doi:10.1038/nsmb.3181)

32. Noinaj N, Kuszak AJ, Gumbart JC, Lukacik P, Chang H, Easley NC, Lithgow T, Buchanan SK. 2013 Structural insight into the biogenesis of beta-barrel membrane proteins. Nature 501, 385–390. (doi:10.1038/nature12521)

33. Albrecht R, Schutz M, Oberhettinger P, Faulstich M, Bermejo I, Rudel T, Diederichs K, Zeth K. 2014 Structure of BamA, an essential factor in outer membrane protein biogenesis. Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr. 70, 1779–1789. (doi:10.1107/S1399004714007482)

34. Ni D et al. 2014 Structural and functional analysis of the beta-barrel domain of BamA from *Escherichia coli*. FASEB J. 28, 2677–2685. (doi:10.1096/fj.13-248450)

35. Wu T, Malinverni J, Ruiz N, Kim S, Silhavy TJ, Kahne D. 2005 Identification of a multicomponent complex required for outer membrane biogenesis in *Escherichia coli*. Cell 121, 235–245. (doi:10.1016/j.cell.2005.02.015)

36. Chimalakonda G, Ruiz N, Chng SS, Garner RA, Kahne D, Silhavy TJ. 2011 Lipoprotein LptE is required for the assembly of LptD by the beta-barrel assembly machine in the outer membrane of *Escherichia coli*. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 2492–2497. (doi:10.1073/pnas.1019089108)

37. Freinkman E, Okuda S, Ruiz N, Kahne D. 2012 Regulated assembly of the transenvelope protein complex required for lipopolysaccharide export. Biochemistry 51, 4800–4806. (doi:10.1021/bi300592c)

38. Grabowicz M, Yeh J, Silhavy TJ. 2013 Dominant negative LptE mutation that supports a role for LptE as a plug in the LptD barrel. J. Bacteriol. 195, 1327–1334. (doi:10.1128/JB.02142-12)

39. van den Berg B, Black PN, Clemons Jr WM, Rapoport TA. 2004 Crystal structure of the long-chain fatty acid transporter FadL. Science 304, 1506–1509. (doi:10.1126/science.1097524)

40. Li X, Gu Y, Dong H, Wang W, Dong C. 2015 Trapped lipopolysaccharide and LptD intermediates reveal lipopolysaccharide translocation steps across the *Escherichia coli* outer membrane. Sci. Rep. 5, 11883. (doi:10.1038/srep11883)

41. Srinivas N et al. 2010 Peptidomimetic antibiotics target outer-membrane biogenesis in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Science 327, 1010–1013. (doi:10.1126/science.1182749)

42. Urfer M et al. 2016 A peptidomimetic antibiotic targets outer membrane proteins and disrupts selectively the outer membrane in *Escherichia coli*. J. Biol. Chem. 291, 1921–1932. (doi:10.1074/jbc.M115.691725)

43. Pugsley AP. 1993 The complete general secretory pathway in gram-negative bacteria. Microbiol. Rev. 57, 50–108.

44. Costello SM, Plummer AM, Fleming PJ, Fleming KG. 2016 Dynamic periplasmic chaperone reservoir facilitates biogenesis of outer membrane proteins.

45. Mahoney TF, Ricci DP, Silhavy TJ. 2016 Classifying beta-barrel assembly substrates by manipulating essential bam complex members. *J. Bacteriol.* **198**, 1984–1992. (doi:10.1128/JB.00263-16)

46. Plummer AM, Fleming KG. 2016 From chaperones to the membrane with a BAM! *Trends Biochem. Sci.* **41**, 872–882. (doi:10.1016/j.tibs.2016.06.005)

47. Buchanan SK, Noinaj N. 2015 *The BAM complex* (ed. JM Walker). New York, NY: Humana Press.

48. Browning DF *et al.* 2015 Cross-species chimeras reveal BamA POTRA and beta-barrel domains must be fine-tuned for efficient OMP insertion. *Mol. Microbiol.* **97**, 646–659. (doi:10.1111/mmi.13052)

49. Sinnige T, Weingarth M, Renault M, Baker L, Tommassen J, Baldus M. 2014 Solid-state NMR studies of full-length BamA in lipid bilayers suggest limited overall POTRA mobility. *J. Mol. Biol.* **426**, 2009–2021. (doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2014.02.007)

50. Gessmann D, Chung YH, Danoff EJ, Plummer AM, Sandlin CW, Zaccai NR, Fleming KG. 2014 Outer membrane beta-barrel protein folding is physically controlled by periplasmic lipid head groups and BamA. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **111**, 5878–5883. (doi:10.1073/pnas.1322473111)

51. Noinaj N, Kuszak AJ, Balusek C, Gumbart JC, Buchanan SK. 2014 Lateral opening and exit pore formation are required for BamA function. *Structure* **22**, 1055–1062. (doi:10.1016/j.str.2014.05.008)

52. Noinaj N *et al.* 2012 Structural basis for iron piracy by pathogenic Neisseria. *Nature* **483**, 53–58. (doi:10.1038/nature10823)

53. O’Neil PK, Rollauer SE, Noinaj N, Buchanan SK. 2015 Fitting the pieces of the beta-barrel assembly machinery complex. *Biochemistry* **54**, 6303–6311. (doi:10.1021/acs.biochem.5b00852)

54. Bergal HT, Hopkins AH, Metzner SI, Sousa MC. 2016 The structure of a BamA-BamD fusion illuminates the architecture of the beta-barrel assembly machine core. *Structure* **24**, 243–251. (doi:10.1016/j.str.2015.10.030)

55. Kim KH, Aulakh S, Paetzel M. 2011 Crystal structure of beta-barrel assembly machinery BamCD protein complex. *J. Biol. Chem.* **286**, 39116–39121. (doi:10.1074/jbc.M111.298166)

56. Jansen KB, Baker SL, Sousa MC. 2015 Crystal structure of BamB bound to a periplasmic domain fragment of BamA, the central component of the beta-barrel assembly machine. *J. Biol. Chem.* **290**, 2126–2136. (doi:10.1074/jbc.M114.584524)

57. Morgado L, Zeth K, Burmann BM, Maier T, Hiller S. 2015 Characterization of the insertase BamA in three different membrane mimetics by solution NMR spectroscopy. *J. Biomol. NMR* **61**, 333–345. (doi:10.1007/s10858-015-9906-y)

58. Sinnige T, Weingarth M, Daniels M, Boelens R, Bonvin AM, Houben K, Baldus M. 2015 Conformational plasticity of the POTRA 5 domain in the outer membrane protein assembly factor BamA. *Structure* **23**, 1317–1324. (doi:10.1016/j.str.2015.04.014)

59. Sinnige T, Houben K, Pritisanac I, Renault M, Boelens R, Baldus M. 2015 Insight into the conformational stability of membrane-embedded BamA using a combined solution and solid-state NMR approach. *J. Biomol. NMR* **61**, 321–332. (doi:10.1007/s10858-014-9891-6)

60. Fleming PJ, Patel DS, Wu EL, Qi Y, Yeom MS, Sousa MC, Fleming KG, Im W. 2016 BamA POTRA domain interacts with a native lipid membrane surface. *Biophys. J.* **110**, 2698–2709. (doi:10.1016/j.bpj.2016.05.010)

61. Hagan CL, Wzorek JS, Kahne D. 2015 Inhibition of the beta-barrel assembly machine by a peptide that binds BamD. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **112**, 2011–2016. (doi:10.1073/pnas.1415955112)

62. Misra R, Stikeleather R, Gabriele R. 2015 In vivo roles of BamA, BamB and BamD in the biogenesis of BamA, a core protein of the beta-barrel assembly machine of *Escherichia coli*. *J. Mol. Biol.* **427**, 1061–1074. (doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2014.04.021)

63. Lee J *et al.* 2016 Characterization of a stalled complex on the beta-barrel assembly machine. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **113**, 8717–8722. (doi:10.1073/pnas.1604100113)

64. Hagan CL, Kim S, Kahne D. 2010 Reconstitution of outer membrane protein assembly from purified components. *Science* **328**, 890–892. (doi:10.1126/science.1188919)

65. Roman-Hernandez G, Peterson JH, Bernstein HD. 2014 Reconstitution of bacterial autotransporter assembly using purified components. *Elife* **3**, e04234. (doi:10.7554/eLife.04234)

66. Ulrich T, Rapaport D. 2015 Biogenesis of beta-barrel proteins in evolutionary context. *Int. J. Med. Microbiol.* **305**, 259–264. (doi:10.1016/j.ijmm.2014.12.009)

67. Hohr Al, Straub SP, Warscheid B, Becker T, Wiedemann N. 2015 Assembly of beta-barrel proteins in the mitochondrial outer membrane. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **1853**, 74–88. (doi:10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.10.006)
