
Science

RESEARCH ARTICLES

Cite as: S. He et al., Science 10.1126/science.aaz9761 (2020).

# Structure of nucleosome-bound human BAF complex

Shuang He${}^{1,2*}$, Zihan Wu${}^{1,2*}$, Yuan Tian${}^{1,2*}$, Zishuo Yu${}^{1,2}$, Jiali Yu${}^{1,2}$, Xinxin Wang${}^{1,2}$, Jie Li${}^{1}$, Bijun Liu${}^{1}$, Yanhui Xu${}^{1,2,3,4†}$

${}^{1}$Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Medical Epigenetics, Shanghai Medical College of Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China. ${}^{2}$The International Co-laboratory of Medical Epigenetics and Metabolism, Ministry of Science and Technology, China, Department of Systems Biology for Medicine, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Shanghai Medical College of Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China. ${}^{3}$Collaborative Innovation Center of Genetics and Development, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China. ${}^{4}$CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

*These authors contributed equally to this work.

†Corresponding author. Email: xuyh@fudan.edu.cn

Mammalian SWI/SNF family chromatin remodelers, BAF and PBAF, regulate chromatin structure and transcription, with their mutations linked to cancers. The 3.7 Å-resolution cryo-EM structure of human BAF bound to nucleosome reveals that the nucleosome is sandwiched by the Base and the ATPase modules, which are bridged by the actin-related protein (ARP) module. The ATPase motor is positioned proximal to nucleosomal DNA and, upon ATP hydrolysis, would engage with and pump DNA along the nucleosome. The C-terminal α-helix of SMARCB1, enriched in positively charged residues frequently mutated in cancers, mediates interactions with an acidic patch of nucleosome. ARID1A and SMARCC serve as a structural core and scaffold in the Base module organization, respectively. Our study provides structural insights into subunit organization and nucleosome recognition of human BAF complex.

## The ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling complexes (also known as chromatin remodelers) regulate chromatin packing state by sliding, ejecting, and restructuring the nucleosome to enable dynamic regulation of chromatin structure (1, 2). As prototype chromatin remodelers, the SWI/SNF complexes possess nucleosome sliding activity and unique ejection activity, and by which create nucleosome depleted regions (NDRs) that are essential for transcriptional regulation (3–10). Mammalian SWI/SNF (mSWI/SNF) complexes, BRG1/BRM-associated factor (BAF) and polybromo-associated BAF (PBAF), consist of up to 15 subunits encoded by over 29 genes, generating over 1400 possible complexes (6, 7, 11, 12). Up to 20% of malignancies contain mutations of BAF/PBAF subunits, making these complexes among the most frequently dysregulated targets in human cancer (4, 7, 13).

Although the compositions and subunit functions of SWI/SNF complexes have been extensively studied (8, 11, 14–19), the structural studies of SWI/SNF complexes have been limited to the low resolution electron microscopy (EM) structures of yeast SWI/SNF complexes (20–23) and structures of isolated domains (15, 24–27). A recent study reported ~7 Å-resolution structure of RSC (yeast homolog of PBAF) bound to nucleosome with the substrate recruitment module (SRM) refined to 3.4 Å resolution (28). However, the molecular mechanisms of subunit organization and nucleosome recognition of mammalian BAF complex remain largely unknown.

### Structure determination

We reconstituted human BAF complex consisting of the catalytic subunit SMARCA4 (BRG1) and 9 auxiliary subunits (Fig. 1A, figs. S1 and S2, and table S1). The purified BAF complexes exhibited nucleosome sliding activities (fig. S1, D to J) and were complexed with nucleosome core particle (NCP) in the absence of ATP/ADP. The cryo-EM structure of BAF-NCP complex (~1.2 megadalton) was determined at an overall resolution of 3.7 Å with the map of Base module locally refined to 3.0 Å resolution (Figs. 1, B to F, and 2A; figs. S3 and S4; table S2; and movies S1 to S5). The structural models were built by fitting available structures into the cryo-EM maps (15, 24, 26, 27, 29) followed by manual model building aided by the cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) (fig. S2, A and B, and data S1 and S2). The 3.7 Å-resolution map and corresponding model were used hereafter unless specified.

### BAF sandwiches nucleosome

The human BAF complex sandwiches nucleosome and its nucleosome-binding manner is distinct from that of other representative chromatin remodelers, including Chd1, SWR1, and INO80 (30–32) (Fig. 1, B to D, and fig. S5). These remodelers primarily bind nucleosomal DNA and/or histone tails but have less contacts with core histones. The sandwiched nucleosome-binding of BAF may provide a structural basis to support nucleosome ejection activity (discussed below). The nucleosomal DNA tends to be detached or disordered at both

First release: 30 January 2020
www.sciencemag.org
(Page numbers not final at time of first release)
entry and exit sites (Fig. 1, E and F, and movie S5), which may allow the DNA translocation to occur more efficiently due to less restraints.

The BAF complex consists of three modules, the ATPase, the actin-related protein (ARP), and the Base modules (Fig. 1A). The majority of the catalytic subunit SMARCA4 (residues 521-1647) forms the ATPase module, which grasps the nucleosome with the ATPase motor partially wrapping around the nucleosomal DNA (Fig. 1, B to D). Within the ARP module, the helicase-SANT-associated region (HSA, residues 446-520) of SMARCA4 binds the heterodimer formed by ACTL6A (BAF53A) and ACTB (β-Actin) (Fig. 1, A and B). The pre-HSA (residues 350-445) of SMARCA4 is anchored into the Base module, in which the SMARCB1 (BAF47, hSNF5, or INI1) packs against the bottom surface of the nucleosome (Fig. 1, A and B).

The ARP module bridges the ATPase and Base modules

The ARP module is formed by ACTL6A-ACTB heterodimer and the long α-helix of the HSA of SMARCA4 (Fig. 1G), revealing a fold similar to the yeast HSA<sup>Snf2</sup>-arp7-arp9-Rtt102 structure (27). The ARP module has no direct contact with nucleosome, but instead, associates with and bridges the ATPase and Base modules (Fig. 1, B, C, and G). Cryo-EM map reveals considerable contacts between the lobe 1 of SMARCA4 ATPase domain and the subdomain 4 (residues 220-250) of ACTL6A (Fig. 1, B and G). Moreover, the pre-HSA in the Base module and post-HSA in the ATPase module are directly connected by the HSA helix. Thus, the ARP module maintains a rigid conformation of the HSA helix and likely couples the motions of the ATPase and Base modules during chromatin remodeling. The observation was consistent with the essential role of the ARP module both in “coupling” the DNA translocation and ATP hydrolysis and in the assembly of functional SWI/SNF complexes (8, 18, 27).

The ATPase motor engages with nucleosomal DNA

Consistent with the lack of ATP/ADP in BAF-NCP structure, the cryo-EM density of the ATPase motor is relatively weak and reveals a tilted and open conformation (angle of ~90° between two ATPase lobes), indicating that the structure represents a pre-engaged conformation (fig. S6). The ATPase motor is positioned to nucleosomal DNA around superhelical location (SHL) 2.5 and the positioning is likely guided by the HSA-associated ARP module and ATPase-associated Snf2 ATP coupling (SnAC) domain. We could observe weak but noticeable cryo-EM density stretching across the top surface of the nucleosome (Fig. 1D and fig. S6A). This region is likely derived from the SnAC and/or bromodomain, which have been shown to bind DNA and/or histone (25, 33, 34).

The structure of BAF-NCP in the presence of ADP was refined to 10.3 Å resolution, in which the ATPase motor adopts a relatively closed conformation (~70°) and has tight contacts to nucleosomal DNA around SHL 2 (fig. S6B and movie S6). Thus, ATP/ADP would promote conformational transition of the BAF complex from a pre-engaged to an engaged state, with the ATPase engaging with nucleosomal DNA, and upon ATP hydrolysis, pumping DNA toward the nucleosome dyad and generating DNA translocation.

The organization of the Base module

The pre-HSA of SMARCA4 is anchored into the Base module, which consists of 7 additional auxiliary subunits including two BAF-specific subunits, ARID1A (BAF250A) and DPF2 (BAF45D), and five BAF/PBAF-shared subunits, SMARCB1, SMARCD1 (BAF60A), SMARCE1 (BAF57), and two copies of SMARCC (8, II, I5-I9) (Figs. 1 and 2). These auxiliary subunits exist exclusively in the Base module and account for about 80% total molecular mass of BAF complex (fig. S4).

The Base module reveals a compact fold and could be divided into five closely associated submodules, the Head, Thumb, Palm, Bridge, and Fingers (Fig. 2). The Head and Bridge respectively bind the nucleosome and the ARP module, generating intermodular contacts (Fig. 1G). The Thumb is formed by a SANT domain of SMARCC, the pre-HSA of SMARCA4, and the C-terminal helices of SMARCD1 (Fig. 2). The Fingers reveals a characteristic Y-shaped 5-helix bundle formed by coiled-coil (CC) domains of SMARCD1, SMARCE1, and two SMARCC subunits. The Palm connects pre-HSA, SMARCD1, SMARCE1, and SMARCC, which merge at a four-way junction.

Nucleosome recognition by SMARCB1 in the Head submodule

The Head directly binds the histone octamer on the bottom (Fig. 1, B and C, and fig. S7A). The Head consists of two RPT domains and a C-terminal α helix (αC) of SMARCB1, the Req domain of DPF2, two SWIRM domains of SMARCCs, and an insert derived from ARID1A (ARID1A-insert) (Fig. 3A and fig. S7B). The two SWIRM domains respectively bind the RPT1 and RPT2 domains. The two RPT-SWRIM complexes adopt similar fold and asymmetrically bind each other, with the intermolecular interactions buttressed by the ARID1A-insert (residues 1802-1862) and Req domain (residues 13-82) of DPF2 (Fig. 3, A and B). The Head merges with the Bridge and the Thumb at a three-way junction and the interactions are mediated by the interweaved loops from DPF2, ARID1A and two SMARCCs (Fig. 3A). The Req of DPF2 is almost identical to that of DPF1/3 in primary sequence, indicating a similar role of DPF1/2/3 in BAF complex organization (fig. S2D).

SMARCB1 is required for structural integrity and function of SWI/SNF complex (16, 17, 35) and inactivation of SMARCB1 was reported in almost all malignant rhabdoid tumors (14, 36-38). The αC helix, enriched in residues that are frequently

First release: 30 January 2020 www.sciencemag.org (Page numbers not final at time of first release) 2mutated in human cancers, packs against the bottom H2A-H2B and serves as a hinge to connect the Base module and nucleosome (Fig. 3C and fig. S7A). The four most frequently mutated arginine residues (370/373/374/377) together form a positively charged cluster and pack against an acidic patch on the bottom of nucleosome (Fig. 3D). The four arginine residues are invariant across species from yeast to human (Fig. 3E) and were clearly visualized in the cryo-EM map (Fig. 3F). The observation highlighted the importance of the αC helix of SMARCB1 in binding nucleosome and was consistent with recent studies (14, 28). Although the αC of Sfh1 (yeast homolog of SMARCB1) is disordered in yeast RSC-NCP complex structure, the deletion of this helix impairs nucleosome ejection activity (28).

The RPT1 domain of SMARCB1 is in close proximity to the α2 helix of histone H2A and likely causes steric clash between histone octamer and DNA (Figs. 1, B and G, and 3C; and fig. S5A), suggesting that RPT1 serves as a “Wedge” to favor the DNA detachment around the exit site. The N-terminal winged helix domain (WH) of SMARCB1 binds the ARM domain of ARID1A and is located over 40 Å away from nucleosomal DNA (Fig. 1, C and G), suggesting a role independent of its previously reported DNA-binding ability (26). The WH domain is in close proximity to the ARP module, suggesting a role in regulating ARP-Base intermodular interactions (Fig. 1, B and C).

### ARID1A serves as a rigid core to stabilize the Base module

ARID1A is the largest subunit of the BAF complex. The large portion of ARID1A, including the characteristic AT-rich interacting domain (ARID), was invisible in the complex structure possibly due to intrinsic flexibility (fig. S2D). The modeled C-terminal ARM domain consists of seven ARM repeats arranged in a superhelical conformation and serves as a rigid core to bind SMARCA4 and all other Base subunits (Fig. 4A). A zinc finger is formed with a zinc atom coordinated with residues H2019 and H2021 on ARM3 and residues H2090 and C2094 on ARM4 (Fig. 4B). The zinc finger stabilizes two ARM repeats and associated loop regions. The ARM domain is located in the center of the Base module with the bottom associating with the Fingers, one end joining with the Head and Thumb, and the other end capped by the SWIB domain of SMARCD1. The N-terminal helical turns of HSA and the preceding loop pack against the concave surface of the ARM domain. The surface residues of ARM contacting SMARCA4 and SMARCD1 are highly conserved, suggesting evolutionarily conserved functions in stabilizing the Base module.

Consistent with the central role of the ARM domain in Base module organization, ARID1A bound to other Base subunits and purified Base subcomplex (fig. S8, A to C). ARID1A is one of the most frequently mutated mSWI/SNF subunits in human cancer and frameshift mutations occur near the C terminus (II, 39), supporting the importance of the C-terminal ARM domain in BAF structure and function. The structure showed that the overall fold of BAF complex would not be properly maintained in the absence of ARID1A (Fig. 4C), although other BAF subunits would remain associated with SMARCC1/C2 because the BAFΔARID1A complex survived ion-exchange chromatography (fig. SIC). The sliding activity of BAFΔARID1A was largely enhanced by the addition of increasing amount of purified ARID1A (Fig. 4D and fig. S8D), indicating that ARID1A is required for efficient nucleosome sliding activity.

ARID1A and ARID1B share highly similar primary sequences and are mutually exclusive in the BAF complex, suggesting ARID1B-containing BAF is assembled in a similar manner (fig. S2D). As a PBAF specific subunit, ARID2 is not a paralog of ARID1A/B and shows a distinct domain architecture. However, the N-terminal helical region (150–470) of ARID2 is predicted to form a 7-repeat ARM domain (40). Thus, the N-terminal ARM domain of ARID2 and the C-terminal ARM domain of ARID1A may play a similar role in organizing PABF and BAF, respectively.

#### SMARCCs are scaffold and SMARCD1/SMARCE1 facilitate Base module organization

As the scaffold of the Base module, the two SMARCC subunits bind all other Base subunits and thread through the Head, Thumb, Palm, and Fingers submodules (Fig. 4C). The BAF complexes containing SMARCC1 and SMARCC2 (BAF-CC1/CC2) and two SMARCC2 subunits (BAF-CC2/CC2) generated almost identical cryo-EM maps (fig. S3). SMARCC1 and SMARCC2 behave similarly in binding other BAF subunits/subcomplexes (fig. S9, D to I, and supplementary text). The observation was consistent with a previous study showing that SMARCC1 and SMARCC2 are functionally similar and play critical roles in early stage of mSWI/SNF complex assembly (II).

SMARCD1 adopts an elongated conformation and runs along with the two SMARCC subunits (Fig. 4C). The SWIB domain adopts a compact globular fold and binds the ARM7 of ARID1A and the CC of SMARCC (Fig. 4A). The α9 helix of SMARCD1 packs against α1 helix of SMARCE1 and a loop of ARID1A, generating a “Pilar” that connects to the Bridge (Figs. 2 and 4A). The α10-α12 helices of SMARCD1 interact with the SANTb domain and pre-HAS with the α12 helix protruding out of the intersection of the Head, Bridge, and Thumb (Fig. 4, A and C). Thus, SMARCD1 and SMARCE1 support SMARCC1/2 in organizing the Base module.

### Comparison of BAF-NCP and RSC-NCP complex structures

The yeast RSC complex is the homolog of mammalian PBAF

First release: 30 January 2020  
www.sciencemag.org  
(Page numbers not final at time of first release) 3complex, which consists of ARID2 (instead of ARID1A/1B) and a PBAF-specific subunit, polybromo-1 (PBRM1 or BAF180). Comparison of our BAF-NCP structure and a recently published yeast RSC-NPC structure (28) revealed a similar nucleosome-binding mode (fig. S10). Surprisingly, the nucleosome is mainly bound by the ATPase domain and the αC helix of Sfh1 is invisible in the RSC-NCP structure (28). In contrast, the nucleosome is sandwiched by BAF with H2A-H2B dimer stably associated with the αC helix of SMARCB1. The two complexes may represent different conformational states or this difference might result from different experimental conditions. Structural comparison also revealed considerable differences in the Base module organization. ARID1A, SMRACC1/2, SMARCD1 and SMARCE1 exhibit conformations distinct from their counterparts in RSC complex. The comparison also suggested that Rsc7 and Htl1 in RSC are equivalents of DPF2 and SMARCE1 of BAF, respectively. BAF has no HB (histone tail-binding) lobe, which may exist exclusively in RSC and PBAF complexes. Homologs of yeast DNA-interaction subunits, RSC3 and RSC30, do not exist in mammals, suggesting that PBAF is also structurally different from RSC.

### Discussion

Our structural and biochemical analyses illustrated the mechanisms of organization and nucleosome recognition of human BAF complex, the prototype mammalian SWI/SNF remodeler (Fig. 5A). BAF ejects nucleosome, creates and maintains NDRs that are essential for transcription. Two non-mutually exclusive models of nucleosome ejection have been proposed (2). The BAF-NCP structure could fit in both models (Fig. 5B). In the first model, the BAF-bound histone octamer, and more possibly the H2A-H2B dimer, could be evicted because of DNA tension resulted from either strong DNA translocation (model 1a, independent of adjacent nucleosome) or in collision with adjacent nucleosome (model 1b). In the second model, BAF sandwiches the nucleosome to ensure that the ATPase domain stably engages with DNA and “peels” the DNA off of the adjacent nucleosome. In both cases, the two nucleosome-sandwiching regions, the SnAC domain of SMARCA4 and the αC helix of SMARCB1, likely play important roles in nucleosome ejection, which has been experimentally demonstrated (14, 16, 28, 33). The DNA detachment may facilitate efficient DNA translocation of the BAF-associated nucleosome because of less DNA-histone contacts. The chromatin ejection may also be promoted by the DNA-interacting ARID domain of ARID1A and/or acetylated histone tail-binding bromodomain of SMARCA4, which were not observed in the cryo-EM map due to flexibility.

---

### REFERENCES AND NOTES

1. C. Y. Zhou, S. L. Johnson, N. I. Gamarra, G. J. Narlikar, Mechanisms of ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling motors. *Annu. Rev. Biophys.* **45**, 153–181 (2016). [doi:10.1146/annurev-biophys-051013-022819](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-biophys-051013-022819) Medline
2. C. R. Clapier, J. Iwasa, B. R. Cairns, C. L. Peterson, Mechanisms of action and regulation of ATP-dependent chromatin-remodeling complexes. *Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* **18**, 407–422 (2017). [doi:10.1038/nrm.2017.26](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm.2017.26) Medline
3. L. K. Elfring, R. Deuring, C. M. McCallum, C. L. Peterson, J. W. Tamkun, Identification and characterization of *Drosophila* relatives of the yeast transcriptional activator SNF2/SWI2. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **14**, 2225–2234 (1994). [doi:10.1128/MCB.14.4.2225](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.14.4.2225) Medline
4. J. Masliah-Planchon, I. Bièche, J. M. Guinebretière, F. Bourdeaut, O. Delattre, SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling and human malignancies. *Annu. Rev. Pathol.* **10**, 145–171 (2015). [doi:10.1146/annurev-pathol-012414-040445](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-pathol-012414-040445) Medline
5. L. Neigeborn, M. Carlson, Genes affecting the regulation of SUC2 gene expression by glucose repression in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*. *Genetics* **108**, 845–858 (1984). [Medline](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/)
6. W. Wang, J. Côté, Y. Xue, S. Zhou, P. A. Khavari, S. R. Biggar, C. Muchardt, G. V. Kalpana, S. P. Goff, M. Yaniv, J. L. Workman, G. R. Crabtree, Purification and biochemical heterogeneity of the mammalian SWI-SNF complex. *EMBO J.* **15**, 5370–5382 (1996). [doi:10.1002/j.1460-2075.1996.tb00921.x](https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1460-2075.1996.tb00921.x) Medline
7. C. Kadoch, G. R. Crabtree, Mammalian SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complexes and cancer: Mechanistic insights gained from human genomics. *Sci. Adv.* **1**, e1500447 (2015). [doi:10.1126/sciadv.1500447](https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1500447) Medline
8. C. R. Clapier, M. M. Kasten, T. J. Parnell, R. Viswanathan, H. Szerlong, G. Sirinakis, Y. Zhang, B. R. Cairns, Regulation of DNA translocation efficiency within the chromatin remodeler RSC/Sth1 potentiates nucleosome sliding and ejection. *Mol. Cell* **62**, 453–461 (2016). [doi:10.1016/j.molcel.2016.03.032](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2016.03.032) Medline
9. M. L. Dechassa, A. Sabri, S. Pondugula, S. R. Kassabov, N. Chatterjee, M. P. Kladde, B. Bartholomew, SWI/SNF has intrinsic nucleosome disassembly activity that is dependent on adjacent nucleosomes. *Mol. Cell* **38**, 590–602 (2010). [doi:10.1016/j.molcel.2010.02.040](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2010.02.040) Medline
10. H. Boeger, J. Griesenbeck, J. S. Strattan, R. D. Kornberg, Removal of promoter nucleosomes by disassembly rather than sliding in vivo. *Mol. Cell* **14**, 667–673 (2004). [doi:10.1016/j.molcel.2004.05.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2004.05.013) Medline
11. N. Mashtalir, A. R. D’Avino, B. C. Michel, J. Luo, J. Pan, J. E. Otto, H. J. Zullo, Z. M. McKenzie, R. L. Kubiak, R. St. Pierre, A. M. Valencia, S. J. Poynter, S. H. Cassel, J. A. Ranish, C. Kadoch, Modular organization and assembly of SWI/SNF family chromatin remodeling complexes. *Cell* **175**, 1272–1288.e20 (2018). [doi:10.1016/j.cell.2018.09.032](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2018.09.032) Medline
12. L. Ho, G. R. Crabtree, Chromatin remodelling during development. *Nature* **463**, 474–484 (2010). [doi:10.1038/nature08911](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature08911) Medline
13. C. Kadoch, D. C. Hargreaves, C. Hodges, L. Elias, L. Ho, J. Ranish, G. R. Crabtree, Proteomic and bioinformatic analysis of mammalian SWI/SNF complexes identifies extensive roles in human malignancy. *Nat. Genet.* **45**, 592–601 (2013). [doi:10.1038/ng.2628](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.2628) Medline
14. A. M. Valencia, C. K. Collings, H. T. Dao, R. St. Pierre, Y.-C. Cheng, J. Huang, Z.-Y. Sun, H.-S. Seo, N. Mashtalir, D. E. Comstock, O. Bolonduro, N. E. Vangos, Z. C. Yeoh, M. K. Dornon, C. Hermawan, L. Barrett, S. Dhe-Paganon, C. J. Woolf, T. W. Muir, C. Kadoch, Recurrent SMARCB1 mutations reveal a nucleosome acidic patch interaction site that potentiates mSWI/SNF complex chromatin remodeling. *Cell* **179**, 1342–1356.e23 (2019). [doi:10.1016/j.cell.2019.10.044](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2019.10.044) Medline
15. L. Yan, S. Xie, Y. Du, C. Qian, Structural insights into BAF47 and BAF155 complex formation. *J. Mol. Biol.* **429**, 1650–1660 (2017). [doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2017.04.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2017.04.008) Medline
16. P. Sen, J. Luo, A. Hada, S. G. Hailu, M. L. Dechassa, J. Persinger, S. Brahma, S. Paul, J. Ranish, B. Bartholomew, Loss of Snf5 induces formation of an aberrant SWI/SNF complex. *Cell Rep.* **18**, 2135–2147 (2017). [doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2017.02.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2017.02.017) Medline
17. X. Wang, R. S. Lee, B. H. Alver, J. R. Haswell, S. Wang, J. Mieczkowski, Y. Drier, S. M. Gillespie, T. C. Archer, J. N. Wu, E. P. Tzvetkov, E. C. Troisi, S. L. Pomeroy, J. A. Biegel, M. Y. Tolstorukov, B. E. Bernstein, P. J. Park, C. W. M. Roberts, SMARCB1-mediated SWI/SNF complex function is essential for enhancer regulation. *Nat. Genet.* **49**, 289–295 (2017). [doi:10.1038/ng.3746](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.3746) Medline

First release: 30 January 2020  
[www.sciencemag.org](http://www.sciencemag.org)  
*(Page numbers not final at time of first release)*  
18. H. Szerlong, K. Hinata, R. Viswanathan, H. Erdjument-Bromage, P. Tempst, B. R. Cairns, The HSA domain binds nuclear actin-related proteins to regulate chromatin-remodeling ATPases. *Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol.* **15**, 469–476 (2008). [doi:10.1038/nsmb.1403](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb.1403) Medline

19. M. L. Phelan, S. Sif, G. J. Narlikar, R. E. Kingston, Reconstitution of a core chromatin remodeling complex from SWI/SNF subunits. *Mol. Cell* **3**, 247–253 (1999). [doi:10.1016/S1097-2765(00)80315-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1097-2765(00)80315-9) Medline

20. M. L. Dechassa, B. Zhang, R. Horowitz-Scherer, J. Persinger, C. L. Woodcock, C. L. Peterson, B. Bartholomew, Architecture of the SWI/SNF-nucleosome complex. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **28**, 6010–6021 (2008). [doi:10.1128/MCB.00693-08](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00693-08) Medline

21. Y. Chaban, C. Ezeokonkwo, W.-H. Chung, F. Zhang, R. D. Kornberg, B. Maier-Davis, Y. Lorch, F. J. Asturias, Structure of a RSC-nucleosome complex and insights into chromatin remodeling. *Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol.* **15**, 1272–1277 (2008). [doi:10.1038/nsmb.1524](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb.1524) Medline

22. C. L. Smith, R. Horowitz-Scherer, J. F. Flanagan, C. L. Woodcock, C. L. Peterson, Structural analysis of the yeast SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex. *Nat. Struct. Biol.* **10**, 141–145 (2003). [doi:10.1038/nsb888](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsb888) Medline

23. F. J. Asturias, W. H. Chung, R. D. Kornberg, Y. Lorch, Structural analysis of the RSC chromatin-remodeling complex. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* **99**, 13477–13480 (2002). [doi:10.1073/pnas.162504299](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.162504299) Medline

24. M. Li, X. Xia, Y. Tian, Q. Jia, X. Liu, Y. Lu, M. Li, X. Li, Z. Chen, Mechanism of DNA translocation underlying chromatin remodelling by Snf2. *Nature* **567**, 409–413 (2019). [doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1029-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1029-2) Medline

25. E. A. Morrison, J. C. Sanchez, J. L. Ronan, D. P. Farrell, K. Varzavand, J. K. Johnson, B. X. Gu, G. R. Crabtree, C. A. Musselman, DNA binding drives the association of BRG1/hBRM bromodomains with nucleosomes. *Nat. Commun.* **8**, 16080 (2017). [doi:10.1038/ncomms16080](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms16080) Medline

26. M. D. Allen, S. M. Freund, G. Zinzalla, M. Bycroft, The SWI/SNF subunit INI1 contains an N-terminal winged helix DNA binding domain that is a target for mutations in schwannomatosis. *Structure* **23**, 1344–1349 (2015). [doi:10.1016/j.str.2015.04.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2015.04.021) Medline

27. H. L. Schubert, J. Wittmeyer, M. M. Kasten, K. Hinata, D. C. Rawling, A. Héroux, B. R. Cairns, C. P. Hill, Structure of an actin-related subcomplex of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeler. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* **110**, 3345–3350 (2013). [doi:10.1073/pnas.1215379110](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1215379110) Medline

28. Y. Ye, H. Wu, K. Chen, C. R. Clapier, N. Verma, W. Zhang, H. Deng, B. R. Cairns, N. Gao, Z. Chen, Structure of the RSC complex bound to the nucleosome. *Science* **366**, 838–843 (2019). [doi:10.1126/science.aay0033](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aay0033) Medline

29. K. Luger, A. W. Mäder, R. K. Richmond, D. F. Sargent, T. J. Richmond, Crystal structure of the nucleosome core particle at 2.8 Å resolution. *Nature* **389**, 251–260 (1997). [doi:10.1038/38444](https://doi.org/10.1038/38444) Medline

30. L. Farnung, S. M. Vos, C. Wigge, P. Cramer, Nucleosome-Chd1 structure and implications for chromatin remodeling. *Nature* **550**, 539–542 (2017). [doi:10.1038/nature24046](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature24046) Medline

31. O. Willhoft, M. Ghoneim, C.-L. Lin, E. Y. D. Chua, M. Wilkinson, Y. Chaban, R. Ayala, E. A. McCormack, L. Ocloo, D. S. Rueda, D. B. Wigley, Structure and dynamics of the yeast SWR1-nucleosome complex. *Science* **362**, eaat7716 (2018). [doi:10.1126/science.aat7716](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aat7716) Medline

32. R. Ayala, O. Willhoft, R. J. Aramayo, M. Wilkinson, E. A. McCormack, L. Ocloo, D. B. Wigley, X. Zhang, Structure and regulation of the human INO80-nucleosome complex. *Nature* **556**, 391–395 (2018). [doi:10.1038/s41586-018-0021-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0021-6) Medline

33. P. Sen, P. Vivas, M. L. Dechassa, A. M. Mooney, M. G. Poirier, B. Bartholomew, The SnAC domain of SWI/SNF is a histone anchor required for remodeling. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **33**, 360–370 (2013). [doi:10.1128/MCB.00922-12](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00922-12) Medline

34. W. Shen, C. Xu, W. Huang, J. Zhang, J. E. Carlson, X. Tu, J. Wu, Y. Shi, Solution structure of human Brg1 bromodomain and its specific binding to acetylated histone tails. *Biochemistry* **46**, 2100–2110 (2007). [doi:10.1021/bi0611208](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi0611208) Medline

35. R. T. Nakayama, J. L. Pulice, A. M. Valencia, M. J. McBride, Z. M. McKenzie, M. A. Gillespie, W. L. Ku, M. Teng, K. Cui, R. T. Williams, S. H. Cassel, H. Qing, C. J. Widmer, G. D. Demetri, R. A. Irizarry, K. Zhao, J. A. Ranish, C. Kadoch, SMARCB1 is required for widespread BAF complex-mediated activation of enhancers and bivalent promoters. *Nat. Genet.* **49**, 1613–1623 (2017). [doi:10.1038/ng.3958](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.3958) Medline

36. I. Versteegge, N. Sévenet, J. Lange, M.-F. Rousseau-Merck, P. Ambros, R. Handgretinger, A. Aurias, O. Delattre, Truncating mutations of hSNF5/INI1 in aggressive paediatric cancer. *Nature* **394**, 203–206 (1998). [doi:10.1038/28212](https://doi.org/10.1038/28212) Medline

37. C. Kadoch, G. R. Crabtree, Reversible disruption of mSWI/SNF (BAF) complexes by the SS18-SSX oncogenic fusion in synovial sarcoma. *Cell* **153**, 71–85 (2013). [doi:10.1016/j.cell.2013.02.036](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.02.036) Medline

38. M. J. McBride, J. L. Pulice, H. C. Beird, D. R. Ingram, A. R. D'Avino, J. F. Shern, G. W. Charville, J. L. Hornick, R. T. Nakayama, E. M. Garcia-Rivera, D. M. Araujo, W.-L. Wang, J.-W. Tsai, M. Yeagley, A. J. Wagner, P. A. Futreal, J. Khan, A. J. Lazar, C. Kadoch, The SS18-SSX fusion oncoprotein hijacks BAF complex targeting and function to drive synovial sarcoma. *Cancer Cell* **33**, 1128–1141.e7 (2018). [doi:10.1016/j.ccell.2018.05.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2018.05.002) Medline

39. R. Mathur, B. H. Alver, A. K. San Roman, B. G. Wilson, X. Wang, A. T. Agoston, P. J. Park, R. A. Shivdasani, C. W. M. Roberts, ARID1A loss impairs enhancer-mediated gene regulation and drives colon cancer in mice. *Nat. Genet.* **49**, 296–302 (2017). [doi:10.1038/ng.3744](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.3744) Medline

40. L. A. Kelley, S. Mezulis, C. M. Yates, M. N. Wass, M. J. Sternberg, The Phyre2 web portal for protein modeling, prediction and analysis. *Nat. Protoc.* **10**, 845–858 (2015). [doi:10.1038/nprot.2015.053](https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2015.053) Medline

41. K. Luger, T. J. Rechsteiner, T. J. Richmond, Expression and purification of recombinant histones and nucleosome reconstitution. *Methods Mol. Biol.* **119**, 1–16 (1999). [doi:10.1385/1-59259-681-9:1](https://doi.org/10.1385/1-59259-681-9:1) Medline

42. F. Song, P. Chen, D. Sun, M. Wang, L. Dong, D. Liang, R.-M. Xu, P. Zhu, G. Li, Cryo-EM study of the chromatin fiber reveals a double helix twisted by tetranucleosomal units. *Science* **344**, 376–380 (2014). [doi:10.1126/science.1251413](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1251413) Medline

43. P. T. Lowary, J. Widom, New DNA sequence rules for high affinity binding to histone octamer and sequence-directed nucleosome positioning. *J. Mol. Biol.* **276**, 19–42 (1998). [doi:10.1006/jmbi.1997.1494](https://doi.org/10.1006/jmbi.1997.1494) Medline

44. X. Chen, M. Liu, Y. Tian, J. Li, Y. Qi, D. Zhao, Z. Wu, M. Huang, C. C. L. Wong, H.-W. Wang, J. Wang, H. Yang, Y. Xu, Cryo-EM structure of human mTOR complex 2. *Cell Res.* **28**, 518–528 (2018). [doi:10.1038/s41422-018-0029-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41422-018-0029-3) Medline

45. B. Yang, Y.-J. Wu, M. Zhu, S.-B. Fan, J. Lin, K. Zhang, S. Li, H. Chi, Y.-X. Li, H.-F. Chen, S.-K. Luo, Y.-H. Ding, L.-H. Wang, Z. Hao, L.-Y. Xiu, S. Chen, K. Ye, S.-M. He, M.-Q. Dong, Identification of cross-linked peptides from complex samples. *Nat. Methods* **9**, 904–906 (2012). [doi:10.1038/nmeth.2099](https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.2099) Medline

46. B. Kastner, N. Fischer, M. M. Golas, B. Sander, P. Dube, D. Boehringer, K. Hartmuth, J. Deckert, F. Hauer, E. Wolf, H. Uchtenhagen, H. Urlaub, F. Herzog, J. M. Peters, D. Poerschke, R. Lührmann, H. Stark, GraFix: Sample preparation for single-particle electron cryomicroscopy. *Nat. Methods* **5**, 53–55 (2008). [doi:10.1038/nmeth1139](https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth1139) Medline

47. D. N. Mastronarde, Automated electron microscope tomography using robust prediction of specimen movements. *J. Struct. Biol.* **152**, 36–51 (2005). [doi:10.1016/j.jsb.2005.07.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsb.2005.07.007) Medline

48. S. Q. Zheng, E. Palovcak, J.-P. Armache, K. A. Verba, Y. Cheng, D. A. Agard, MotionCor2: Anisotropic correction of beam-induced motion for improved cryo-electron microscopy. *Nat. Methods* **14**, 331–332 (2017). [doi:10.1038/nmeth.4193](https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.4193) Medline

49. K. Zhang, Gctf: Real-time CTF determination and correction. *J. Struct. Biol.* **193**, 1–12 (2016). [doi:10.1016/j.jsb.2015.11.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsb.2015.11.003) Medline

50. S. H. Scheres, RELION: Implementation of a Bayesian approach to cryo-EM structure determination. *J. Struct. Biol.* **180**, 519–530 (2012). [doi:10.1016/j.jsb.2012.09.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsb.2012.09.006) Medline

51. D. Kimanius, B. O. Forsberg, S. H. Scheres, E. Lindahl, Accelerated cryo-EM structure determination with parallelisation using GPUs in RELION-2. *eLife* **5**, e18722 (2016). [doi:10.7554/eLife.18722](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.18722) Medline

52. Y. Z. Tan, P. R. Baldwin, J. H. Davis, J. R. Williamson, C. S. Potter, B. Carragher, D. Lyumkis, Addressing preferred specimen orientation in single-particle cryo-EM through tilting. *Nat. Methods* **14**, 793–796 (2017). [doi:10.1038/nmeth.4347](https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.4347) Medline

53. E. F. Pettersen, T. D. Goddard, C. C. Huang, G. S. Couch, D. M. Greenblatt, E. C. Meng, T. E. Ferrin, UCSF Chimera—A visualization system for exploratory research and analysis. *J. Comput. Chem.* **25**, 1605–1612 (2004). [doi:10.1002/jcc.20084](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcc.20084) Medline

54. T. D. Goddard, C. C. Huang, E. C. Meng, E. F. Pettersen, G. S. Couch, J. H. Morris, T. E. Ferrin, UCSF ChimeraX: Meeting modern challenges in visualization and analysis. *Protein Sci.* 27, 14–25 (2018). [doi:10.1002/pro.3235](https://doi.org/10.1002/pro.3235) Medline

55. X. Liu, M. Li, X. Xia, X. Li, Z. Chen, Mechanism of chromatin remodelling revealed by the Snf2-nucleosome structure. *Nature* 544, 440–445 (2017). [doi:10.1038/nature22036](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature22036) Medline

56. P. Emsley, K. Cowtan, Coot: Model-building tools for molecular graphics. *Acta Crystallogr. D* 60, 2126–2132 (2004). [doi:10.1107/S0907444904019158](https://doi.org/10.1107/S0907444904019158) Medline

57. P. D. Adams, R. W. Grosse-Kunstleve, L.-W. Hung, T. R. Ioerger, A. J. McCoy, N. W. Moriarty, R. J. Read, J. C. Sacchettini, N. K. Sauter, T. C. Terwilliger, PHENIX: Building new software for automated crystallographic structure determination. *Acta Crystallogr. D* 58, 1948–1954 (2002). [doi:10.1107/S0907444902016657](https://doi.org/10.1107/S0907444902016657) Medline

58. A. Amunts, A. Brown, X. C. Bai, J. L. Llácer, T. Hussain, P. Emsley, F. Long, G. Murshudov, S. H. W. Scheres, V. Ramakrishnan, Structure of the yeast mitochondrial large ribosomal subunit. *Science* 343, 1485–1489 (2014). [doi:10.1126/science.1249410](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1249410) Medline

59. V. B. Chen, W. B. Arendall 3rd, J. J. Headd, D. A. Keedy, R. M. Immormino, G. J. Kapral, L. W. Murray, J. S. Richardson, D. C. Richardson, MolProbity: All-atom structure validation for macromolecular crystallography. *Acta Crystallogr. D* 66, 12–21 (2010). [doi:10.1107/S0907444909042073](https://doi.org/10.1107/S0907444909042073) Medline

60. W. L. DeLano, The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System; [www.pymol.org](http://www.pymol.org).

61. J. G. Tate, S. Bamford, H. C. Jubb, Z. Sondka, D. M. Beare, N. Bindal, H. Boutselakis, C. G. Cole, C. Creatore, E. Dawson, P. Fish, B. Harsha, C. Hathaway, S. C. Jupe, C. Y. Kok, K. Noble, L. Ponting, C. C. Ramshaw, C. E. Rye, H. E. Speedy, R. Stefancsik, S. L. Thompson, S. Wang, S. Ward, P. J. Campbell, S. A. Forbes, COSMIC: The Catalogue Of Somatic Mutations In Cancer. *Nucleic Acids Res.* 47, D941-D947 (2019). [doi:10.1093/nar/gky1015](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky1015) Medline

**ACKNOWLEDGMENTS**

We thank Center of Cryo-Electron Microscopy, Fudan University, Center of Cryo-Electron Microscopy, ShanghaiTech University, Center for Biological Imaging of Institute of Biophysics (IBP) of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), and National Center for Protein Science Shanghai (NCPSS) for the supports on cryo-EM data collection and data analyses and the Biomedical Core Facility, Fudan University, for the support on mass spectrometry analyses. **Funding:** This work was supported by grants from the National key R&D program of China (2016YFA0500700), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (31830107, 31821002, 31425008), the National Ten-Thousand Talent Program (Y. X.), the National Program for support of Top-Notch Young Professionals (Y. X.), and the Strategic Priority Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (grant no. XDB08000000). **Author contributions:** S. H. prepared the samples for structural and biochemical analyses with help from J. Y., J. L., X. W. and B. L.; Z. W. and Y. T. performed EM analyses and model building with help from Z. Y.; Y. X. and S. H. wrote the manuscript; Y. X. supervised the project. **Competing interests:** Authors declare no competing interests. **Data and materials availability:** Cryo-EM maps have been deposited in the EMDB with accession numbers EMD-0968 (Base module), EMD-0969 (ARP module), EMD-0970 (ATPase-NCP with αC of SMARCB1), EMD-0972 (ATPase-NCP with detached DNA), EMD-0974 (BAF-NCP, 3.7 Å), EMD-0971 (BAF-NCP, 6.6 Å), EMD-0973 (BAF<sup>ADP</sup>-NCP). Atomic coordinates for the Base module and BAF-NCP have been deposited in the PDB with accession code 6LTH and 6LTJ, respectively.

**SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS**

[science.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/science.aaz9761/DC1](https://science.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/science.aaz9761/DC1)

Materials and Methods  
Supplementary Text  
Figs. S1 to S10  
Tables S1 and S2  
References (41–61)  
Movies S1 to S6  
Data S1 and S2

Fig. 1. Cryo-EM structure of human BAF bound to NCP. (A) Schematic architecture of BAF complex organization and domain structure of BAF subunits. Color scheme for BAF subunits is indicated below the model and used throughout all figures. Two SMARCC2 molecules are respectively colored. (B to D) The 3.7-Å resolution cryo-EM map of BAF-NCP in the absence of ADP in three different views. The map at a higher threshold level (B, right panel) reveals more details with the ATPase module fading out. The map at lower threshold level (B, left panel) reveals density (likely derived from SnAC) packing across the top surface of nucleosome. The intermodular contacts and BAF-NCP contacts are highlighted in white circles. (E and F) Two different views of the cryo-EM map of nucleosome showing detached/disordered DNA at entry (E) and exit (F) sites. The positions of nucleosomal DNA are labeled in SHL numbers. (G) Cartoon model of BAF-NCP structure shown in two different views. Abbreviations: RPT: Repeat domain; Req: Requiem domain; SWIRM: SWI3, RSC8 and MOIRA; SANT: Swi3, Ada2, N-Cor, and TFIIB; ARM: armadillo repeats; CC: coiled-coil; HSA: helicase-SANT-associated; ARP: actin-related protein; BR: bromodomain; WH: winged helix; SWIB: SWI/SNF complex B/MDM2.

Fig. 2. Structure of the Base module. (A) The cryo-EM map of the Base module locally refined to 3.0 Å resolution. The submodules and elements involved in complex assembly are indicated. (B) Cartoon model of the Base module in two different views. Regions that are involved in nucleosome recognition and complex formation are indicated. CC-C2<sup>a*</sup> and CC-C2<sup>b*</sup> represent a possible assignment of two CCs of SMRACC2 due to disconnected cryo-EM map.

Fig. 3. Structure of the Head submodule and role of SMARCB1 in nucleosome recognition. (A) Close-up view of the Head submodule and its interactions with the Bridge and Thumb submodules. The sandwiched loops located in a three-way junction are highlighted in blue circle. (B) Close-up view of the contacts between SMARCB1 and the bottom surface of nucleosome. Four histone-contacting arginine residues on the helix αC are shown in stick representation. (C) Close-up view of interactions between the Req domain of DPF2 shown in cartoon and RTP2-SWIRM<sup>b</sup> shown in surface representation (red represents negative charge; blue represents positive charge). (D) Basic residues of helix αC pack against acidic surface of histone octamer. The positively charged residues are shown in sticks. (E) Conservation of helix αC of SMARCB1. The invariant and highly conserved residues are highlighted with dark-green and green background, respectively. (F) The cryo-EM map around αC is shown in mesh in two views. The sidechains of abovementioned residues are well-coved by the map.

Fig. 4. Subunit organization in the Base module. (A) Cartoon model of interactions between ARID1A and other subunits is shown in two views. Middle left panel, the surface of ARM domain is shown and colored according to the conservation scores. Middle right panel, seven ARM repeats are shown with front helices colored in yellow, back helices colored in green, ridge helices/loops colored in blue. (B) Close-up view of the zinc finger connecting ARM3 and ARM4 with zinc-coordinating residues shown in sticks and zinc atom shown as a gray ball. The location of zinc finger is indicated in upper panel of (A). (C) Cartoon of the Base module with ARID1A and SMARCA4 omitted. The lack of ARID1A would lead to a clash of the Base module although other subunits remain associated by the scaffold subunits, SMARCC1/2. The yellow triangle indicates a three-way junction of the Head, Thumb, and Bridge. (D) In vitro nucleosome sliding assay performed using purified BAFΔARID1A complex and increasing amounts of purified ARID1A. Note that BAFΔARID1A possesses nucleosome sliding activity in higher protein concentration (fig. S8D).

Fig. 5. Models of chromatin remodeling of the BAF complex. (A) BAF subunits are shown in cartoon model. The indicated paralogs of BAF subunits are mutually exclusive in BAF complex. The nucleosome is sandwiched by the SMARCA2/4 and SMARCB1. The ATPase of SMARCA2/4 grasps nucleosomal DNA and generates DNA translocation in an ATP-dependent manner. (B) The BAF-NCP structure could fit in two non-exclusive models of nucleosome ejection. The histone octamer or dimer could be ejected from BAF-bound (model 1) or the adjacent (model 2) nucleosome. The ejection could occur independent (model 1a) or dependent (model 1b) of the adjacent nucleosome.

Science

Structure of nucleosome-bound human BAF complex  
Shuang He, Zihan Wu, Yuan Tian, Zishuo Yu, Jiali Yu, Xinxin Wang, Jie Li, Bijun Liu and Yanhui Xu  

published online January 30, 2020  

ARTICLE TOOLS  
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/early/2020/01/29/science.aaz9761  

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS  
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2020/01/29/science.aaz9761.DC1  

REFERENCES  
This article cites 60 articles, 11 of which you can access for free  
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/early/2020/01/29/science.aaz9761#BIBL  

PERMISSIONS  
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions  

Use of this article is subject to the Terms of Service  

Science (print ISSN 0036-8075; online ISSN 1095-9203) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. The title Science is a registered trademark of AAAS.  

Copyright © 2020, American Association for the Advancement of Science
