
Article

The native structure of the assembled matrix protein 1 of influenza A virus

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2696-8

Received: 9 April 2020

Accepted: 19 June 2020

Published online: 09 September 2020

Check for updates

Julia Peukes${}^{1,2,3,11}$, Xiaoli Xiong${}^{1,7,11}\text{※}$, Simon Erlendsson${}^{1}$, Kun Qu${}^{1}$, William Wan${}^{2,8}$, Leslie J. Calder${}^{4}$, Oliver Schraidt${}^{2,9}$, Susann Kummer${}^{5,10}$, Stefan M. V. Freund${}^{1}$, Hans-Georg Kräusslich${}^{5,6}$ & John A. G. Briggs${}^{1,2}\text{※}$

Influenza A virus causes millions of severe cases of disease during annual epidemics. The most abundant protein in influenza virions is matrix protein 1 (M1), which mediates virus assembly by forming an endoskeleton beneath the virus membrane${}^{1}$. The structure of full-length M1, and how it oligomerizes to mediate the assembly of virions, is unknown. Here we determine the complete structure of assembled M1 within intact virus particles, as well as the structure of M1 oligomers reconstituted in vitro. We find that the C-terminal domain of M1 is disordered in solution but can fold and bind in trans to the N-terminal domain of another M1 monomer, thus polymerizing M1 into linear strands that coat the interior surface of the membrane of the assembling virion. In the M1 polymer, five histidine residues—contributed by three different monomers of M1—form a cluster that can serve as the pH-sensitive disassembly switch after entry into a target cell. These structures therefore reveal mechanisms of influenza virus assembly and disassembly.

The genome segments and associated proteins of influenza A virus are protected by a lipid envelope that is derived from the cell membrane of the host. The exterior of the envelope is densely decorated with the membrane-anchored glycoproteins haemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA), and M1 is tightly associated with the inner surface of the viral membrane${}^{1}$. M1 interacts with viral ribonucleoproteins${}^{2,3}$ and the cytoplasmic tails of the viral glycoproteins HA and NA${}^{1,4,5}$ to promote their incorporation into virions. Influenza virions are pleomorphic, producing filamentous and spherical virions${}^{6,7}$. Classical electron microscopy suggests that M1 forms a helical arrangement of fibres in both filamentous${}^{8,9}$ and spherical virions${}^{10}$. After uptake into a target cell, pH-induced structural changes in M1 are thought to contribute to virus entry and disassembly${}^{11}$.

The 252-residue long, 28-kDa M1 consists of an N- and C-terminal domain (NTD and CTD, respectively). The structure of the NTD has previously been determined by crystallography, which revealed a globular fold of nine α-helices and a highly charged surface${}^{12-14}$. There are no structures available for the CTD of M1. A structure of the full-length matrix protein is available from an orthomyxovirus infectious salmon anaemia virus; however, the fact that there is substantial divergence (18% sequence identity) between the matrix proteins of these two viruses makes it unclear how relevant the structure of the matrix protein of infectious salmon anaemia virus is to influenza A virus${}^{15}$.

To avoid purification artefacts${}^{16}$, we performed cryo-electron tomography (cryo-ET) on influenza strain A/Hong Kong/1/1968 (H3N2) (hereafter, HK68) virions directly budding from infected cells${}^{17}$. We observed filamentous virus particles radiating from infected cells, as well as isolated filamentous virions (Fig. 1a). A dense glycoprotein layer was seen on the outer surface of the virus envelope, and a thin M1 layer was seen directly underneath the viral membrane (Fig. 1b).

We performed reference-free subtomogram averaging for the M1 density layer from each virion individually. We found that M1 forms tightly packed linear polymers that assemble in a helical array (Fig. 1c). The spacing between strands (about 3.6 nm) is similar to that observed in classical electron microscopy experiments${}^{8-10,18}$. The diameter of the virions and the number of parallel polymer strands vary (1–6 strands at a radius of between 18 and 29 nm) (Extended Data Fig. 1). We combined M1 subtomograms from virions with three strands into a larger dataset. The resulting reconstruction of M1 in situ shows the inner and outer leaflet of the membrane bilayer with a two-lobed protein layer bound tightly to its inner surface (Fig. 1d, Extended Data Fig. 2a–c).

Co-expression of M1 together with HA or NA is sufficient to form filamentous protrusions, which—in the presence of matrix protein 2 (M2)—are released as particles that closely resemble virions${}^{19}$. We next co-expressed the influenza A virus HK68 proteins HA, NA, M1 and M2 to form virus-like particles (VLPs)${}^{19}$, and imaged them in the same way as for virions. VLPs were essentially indistinguishable from viral filaments (Extended Data Fig. 2a, d). We determined the structure of the M1 layer from the VLPs (Extended Data Fig. 2d–f), and found it to be identical to that obtained from virions (Extended Data Fig. 2g–i). Owing to its more isotropic resolution (Extended Data Fig. 2f), we used the M1 reconstruction obtained from the VLPs for further interpretation.

${}^{1}$Structural Studies Division, Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK. ${}^{2}$Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany. ${}^{3}$Joint PhD Program, EMBL and Faculty of Biosciences, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany. ${}^{4}$Structural Biology of Cells and Viruses Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London, UK. ${}^{5}$Department of Infectious Diseases, Virology, Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. ${}^{6}$German Center for Infection Research, Heidelberg, Germany. ${}^{7}$Present address: Guangzhou Regenerative Medicine and Health - Guangdong Laboratory, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, China. ${}^{8}$Present address: Department of Biochemistry, Center of Structural Biology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA. ${}^{9}$Present address: International Iberian Nanotechnology Laboratory, Braga, Portugal. ${}^{10}$Present address: Center for Biological Threats and Special Pathogens, Robert Koch Institute, Berlin, Germany. ${}^{11}$These authors contributed equally: Julia Peukes, Xiaoli Xiong. $\text{※}$e-mail: xiong_xiaoli@gibh.ac.cn; jbriggs@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk

Article

M1 CTD (Fig. 2b, c). The CTD contains three cylindrical densities that suggest that it folds into a three-helix globular domain, and its orientation suggests the formation of a trans interface in which it interacts with the membrane-distal surface of the NTD from the neighbouring M1 monomer in the linear polymer (Fig. 2b). A trans interface between NTD and CTD is present within the crystal packing of the matrix protein of infectious salmon anaemia virus¹⁵ (Extended Data Fig. 3d).

To obtain a higher-resolution structure of M1, we expressed and purified recombinant full-length M1. We characterized the purified protein by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) (Extended Data Fig. 4a), and found that it is monomeric in solution at neutral pH and has a radius of hydration of about 25 Å (Extended Data Fig. 4b). The NTD adopts the same nine-helix fold as present in previously determined crystal structures¹²⁻¹⁴. By contrast, the CTD is largely disordered—consistent with previous observations²⁴—and does not adopt detectable tertiary structure when the pH is increased (Extended Data Fig. 4c). We identified three stretches of the CTD with some helical propensity, corresponding to residues 171–190 (helix 10), 196–218 (helix 11) and 231–246 (helix 12) (Extended Data Fig. 4d).

We assembled purified M1 into helical tubes in the presence of nucleic acid and imaged them by cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) (Extended Data Fig. 5a–d); coiled structures similar to these tubes have previously been observed in flu virions with disrupted M1 layers¹⁸. We reconstructed a map at a resolution of 3.8 Å that resolved both the NTD and CTD (Extended Data Fig. 5e–i). The helix exhibits a pitch of 100.0 Å and has 32.4 M1 dimers in each helical turn (Fig. 2d). M1 dimerizes via its NTD membrane-binding surface, giving rise to two antiparallel linear polymer strands, introducing D1 symmetry and making the helix apolar. Two nucleic acid filaments are found inside the helix, one at the NTD–NTD dimerization interface (yellow strand in Fig. 2d) and the other in a groove formed at the CTD–CTD interface (pink strand in Fig. 2d): both of these filaments appear to be nonspecifically bound, and only unfeatured density was observed (Extended Data Fig. 6a). The 3.8 Å-resolution density map allowed building of an atomic model for the full-length M1 protein (Figs. 2e, f, 3, Extended Data Fig. 5g–i).

The linear M1 strand from the in vitro helical assembly curves in a direction orthogonal to that of the M1 strand from the virion, and with opposite handedness. However, the structure and arrangement of M1 within the linear M1 strands are very similar in both cases (Fig. 2, Extended Data Fig. 6b). The same surfaces of the NTD mediate polymerization, placing the C terminus in the same trans interacting position. We therefore interpret the in vitro assembly as a higher-resolution model for the structure and arrangement of M1 strands within the virion.

The structure of the NTD is essentially identical to that of structures of N-terminal fragments that have previously been determined by X-ray crystallography (PDB codes 1AA7¹², 1EA3¹³ and 5V6G²⁵), with the exception of the helix 4–helix 5 loop, which adopts a different conformation in our structure (Extended Data Fig. 6c).

The last helix in the NTD (helix 9) extends by three helical turns beyond the crystal structure, before Pro171 bends the peptide chain backwards to form the CTD. The CTD is composed of 82 residues organized into 3 helices (Fig. 3), which were found at the positions at which helical propensity was highest in the NMR experiments (Extended Data Fig. 4). The extension of helix 9 positions the CTD below the membrane-distal surface of the neighbouring NTD (as in the viral structure), where it forms a tight interaction (Fig. 3a–c). The NTD–CTD interface appears to be stabilized by charge complementarity between the negatively charged membrane-distal surface of the NTD (residues Glu8, Glu23, Glu29 and Asp30), and the positively charged interacting surface of the CTD (residues Lys187, Arg210 and Arg217), as well as by an intermolecular salt bridge between Lys21 and Glu176 (Fig. 3c).

The three-helix bundle of the CTD is stabilized by two methionine-rich hydrophobic cores, one containing Met189, Met192, Met244 and Met248 and the other containing Met179, Met212 and Met216 (Fig. 3d). The two hydrophobic cores from neighbouring monomers in the strand

Fig. 1 | Cryo-ET of influenza AHK68 virions. a, Two-dimensional cryo-EM image of influenza AHK68 virions surrounding an infected cell (outlined in red). Scale bar, 1 μm. b, Central slice through a tomogram of an individual influenza AHK68 virion. The surface HA layer (orange), the membrane (mem) and the M1 matrix layer (blue) are marked. Scale bar, 20 nm. Images in a, b are representative of three independent preparations of virus. c, M1 assembles parallel helical strands, visualized by marking the positions of aligned M1 subtomograms within the original tomogram volumes. A right-handed helix with six parallel M1 strands is shown. Scale bar, 20 nm. d, Projection through 1.8 nm of 3 parallel strands of the M1 structure determined by subtomogram averaging. The membrane bilayer (mem) and the outer and the inner lobes of the M1 reconstruction (M1out and M1in, respectively) are marked. Dark densities correspond to slices through protein α-helices. The size and orientation of the view correspond to the black square in b. Scale bar, 2 nm.

At the resolution we obtained (about 8 Å), we clearly observed the α-helices within individual M1 monomers. The crystal structure of the M1 NTD monomer determined at pH 7 (Protein Data Bank (PDB) code 1EA3¹³), a pH similar to that of the interior of flu virions, could be fitted as a rigid body into the membrane-proximal lobe of our structure; all nine α-helices of the M1 NTD monomers are accommodated by the density (Fig. 2a, b). Previous biochemical studies have suggested that the M1 NTD interacts with negatively charged phospholipids via electrostatic interactions¹³,²⁰. Consistent with these observations, in our structure the interaction between M1 and the membrane is mediated by a positively charged surface formed by helices 5, 6 and 8 (green residues in Fig. 2c).

Fitting multiple copies of the M1 NTD structure reveals that M1 polymerizes into parallel linear strands packed tightly together (Fig. 2a). Within the strands, loops between NTD helices form an interface similar to the crystal packing in the M1 NTD crystal obtained at neutral pH (PDB code 1EA3¹³) (Extended Data Fig. 3a). Each M1 NTD appears in close proximity to two monomers on each adjacent strand (Extended Data Fig. 3b, middle). Positively charged residues from helix 6 face negatively charged residues in the parallel strand, predominantly in helix 3 (Extended Data Fig. 3b, c). The interface between monomers from adjacent strands is small (about 360 Å²), which suggests a weak interaction that may allow strands to slide relative to each other. Several mutations or variations that alter virion morphology²¹⁻²³ are located at the M1 NTD–NTD interstrand interface (magenta residues in Fig. 2c), which suggests that strand packing may modulate virion morphology.

The density for helix 9 extends beyond the crystallized helix 9, protruding downwards into the inner-lobe density that corresponds to the

Fig. 2 | Structure and assembly of influenza M1. **a**, Arrangement of M1 within VLPs of influenza AHK68 HA-NA-M1-M2, visualized by placing the M1 monomer structure at orientations and positions determined by subtomogram averaging. Three parallel strands are shown, each of which is a different colour. Some monomers have been removed to reveal the inside of the filament. **b**, The structure of three neighbouring M1 monomers in a strand determined by subtomogram averaging (grey surface), fitted with a crystal structure of the M1 NTD (PDB code 1EA3<sup>13</sup>) and a secondary-structure model for the M1 CTD. The grey line indicates the position of the membrane. **c**, The model of an individual M1 monomer. Helix (H) numbers are indicated. Positively charged residues that make membrane interactions are shown in green (residues 76–78 in H5, 101 and 104 in H6, and 134 in H8). Residues at the interstrand interface of which mutation alters virion morphology are shown in magenta (residue 41 in H3, and residues 95 and 102 in H6). **d**, Arrangement of M1 (green and white) within helical assemblies of M1 assembly in vitro. Nucleic acid strands are shown in yellow and pink. **e**, Three neighbouring M1 monomers extracted from the full reconstruction (grey isosurface), fitted with the atomic model built based on this density. **f**, The model of an individual monomer.

The helix-9 extension interacts with neighbouring M1 monomers in both the +1 and −1 positions (Fig. 3a, b, e). Directly adjacent to the helix-9 extension, we resolve an interaction between the N terminus of the +1 M1, and the loop between helices 11 and 12 of the −1 M1 (Fig. 3e): there are, therefore, direct interactions between three M1 monomers centred around the helix-9 extension. All three monomers contribute to form a highly positively charged amino acid cluster of five arginine or lysine residues, and five histidine residues. The helix-9 extension of the central monomer contributes His159, Arg160, His162 and Arg163; helix 7 in the

interact with one another via a hydrophobic interface that includes Ile219 and Leu229 of one monomer and Met192, Met248 and Phe251 of the neighbouring monomer (Fig. 3d).

Overall, linear polymerization of full-length M1 by trans interactions between the NTD and the neighbouring CTD buries a surface area of 2,137 Å² per monomer, compared to 776 Å² contributed by the NTD (residues 1–158) alone. These extra interfaces contribute considerable energy to promote M1 polymerization, membrane bending<sup>26</sup> and virion-filament extension.

Fig. 3 | Interactions that mediate assembly of M1. **a**, Three neighbouring M1 monomers from an M1 strand, viewed as in Fig. 2e. **b**, A 180°-rotated view of a. In **a**,**b**, residues involved in monomer polymerization are shown in stick representation. The top and bottom boxes in **a** indicate regions magnified in **c** and **d**, respectively; the box in **b** indicates the region magnified in **e**. **c**, Charged residues mediate interactions between the CTD of monomer 0 (green) and the NTD of monomer +1. **d**, Hydrophobic residues mediate interactions between neighbouring CTDs. **e**, A histidine-rich, positively charged cluster is formed at the interface of three M1 monomers.

Article

NTD of the +1M1 monomer contributes His110 and Lys113; and the CTD  
of the –1M1 monomer contributes residues Arg174, His175, His222 and  
Lys230 (Fig. 3e). A sequence analysis of M1 reveals that this cluster is  
highly conserved, which suggests this feature is important for the influenza life cycle. Indeed, four of the five histidines are strictly conserved  
in influenza A virus (Extended Data Fig. 7), and although His222Gln  
substitutions are found in some H9N2 viruses and His159Tyr substitutions  
are present in some bat-derived H17N10 and H18N11 sequences,  
these are compensated by Gln158His and Gln153His substitutions,  
respectively (Fig. 3e, Extended Data Fig. 7). Histidine can function  
as a pH sensor, and histidine clusters regulate structural changes in  
response to low pH in a range of viruses^{27,28}. The M1 layer disintegrates  
and dissociates from the membrane when influenza virions are exposed  
to low pH^{11,29,30}. Protonation of the five histidines in this cluster would  
introduce additional positive charges, providing a mechanism to trigger  
destabilization and disassembly of the M1 layer in the endosome.  
Our observations show that M1 of influenza A virus polymerizes  
into parallel linear strands that assemble helical arrays to form the  
viral endoskeleton. Polymerization is associated with an extension of  
helix 9 and the transition of the CTD from an unfolded to a folded state,  
upon which it interacts with the NTD of the neighbouring M1 molecule  
in the strand. This arrangement implies that virus assembly will be  
processive: the binding of M1 into the strand induces conformational  
changes that create new interfaces, which promotes the binding of  
the next monomer. Assembly buries a large surface area, providing  
an energy source to drive assembly and protrusion of the virion. Once  
assembled, five histidines—which are distant in sequence and contributed by three sequential M1 monomers in the strand—come together  
to form a histidine cluster that can serve as the trigger for pH-mediated  
M1 disassembly.

Online content

Any methods, additional references, Nature Research reporting summaries, source data, extended data, supplementary information, acknowledgements, peer review information; details of author contributions and competing interests; and statements of data and code availability are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2696-8.

1. Rossman, J. S. & Lamb, R. A. Influenza virus assembly and budding. *Virology* **411**, 229–236 (2011).
2. Elster, C., Larsen, K., Gagnon, J., Ruigrok, R. W. & Baudin, F. Influenza virus M1 protein binds to RNA through its nuclear localization signal. *J. Gen. Virol.* **78**, 1589–1596 (1997).
3. Noton, S. L. et al. Identification of the domains of the influenza A virus M1 matrix protein required for NP binding, oligomerization and incorporation into virions. *J. Gen. Virol.* **88**, 2280–2290 (2007).
4. Chen, B. J., Takeda, M. & Lamb, R. A. Influenza virus hemagglutinin (H3 subtype) requires palmitoylation of its cytoplasmic tail for assembly: M1 proteins of two subtypes differ in their ability to support assembly. *J. Virol.* **79**, 13673–13684 (2005).
5. Zhang, J., Pekosz, A. & Lamb, R. A. Influenza virus assembly and lipid raft microdomains: a role for the cytoplasmic tails of the spike glycoproteins. *J. Virol.* **74**, 4634–4644 (2000).

6. Chu, C. M., Dawson, I. M. & Elford, W. J. Filamentous forms associated with newly isolated influenza virus. *Lancet* **253**, 602 (1949).
7. Mosley, V. M. & Wyckoff, R. W. G. Electron micrography of the virus of influenza. *Nature* **157**, 263 (1946).
8. Wrigley, N. G. Electron microscopy of influenza virus. *Br. Med. Bull.* **35**, 35–38 (1979).
9. Ruigrok, R. W., Calder, L. J. & Wharton, S. A. Electron microscopy of the influenza virus submembranal structure. *Virology* **173**, 311–316 (1989).
10. Nermut, M. V. Further investigation on the fine structure of influenza virus. *J. Gen. Virol.* **17**, 317–331 (1972).
11. Fontana, J. & Steven, A. C. At low pH, influenza virus matrix protein M1 undergoes a conformational change prior to dissociating from the membrane. *J. Virol.* **87**, 5621–5628 (2013).
12. Sha, B. & Luo, M. Structure of a bifunctional membrane-RNA binding protein, influenza virus matrix protein M1. *Nat. Struct. Biol.* **4**, 239–244 (1997).
13. Arzt, S. et al. Combined results from solution studies on intact influenza virus M1 protein and from a new crystal form of its N-terminal domain show that M1 is an elongated monomer. *Virology* **279**, 439–446 (2001).
14. Harris, A., Forouhar, F., Qiu, S., Sha, B. & Luo, M. The crystal structure of the influenza matrix protein M1 at neutral pH: M1-M1 protein interfaces can rotate in the oligomeric structures of M1. *Virology* **289**, 34–44 (2001).
15. Zhang, W. et al. Crystal structure of an orthomyxovirus matrix protein reveals mechanisms for self-polymerization and membrane association. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **114**, 8550–8555 (2017).
16. Sugita, Y., Noda, T., Sagara, H. & Kawaoka, Y. Ultracentrifugation deforms unfixed influenza A virions. *J. Gen. Virol.* **92**, 2485–2493 (2011).
17. Vijaykrishnan, S. et al. Cryotomography of budding influenza A virus reveals filaments with diverse morphologies that mostly do not bear a genome at their distal end. *PLoS Pathog.* **9**, e1003413 (2013).
18. Calder, L. J., Wasilewski, S., Berriman, J. A. & Rosenthal, P. B. Structural organization of a filamentous influenza A virus. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **107**, 10685–10690 (2010).
19. Chlanda, P. et al. Structural analysis of the roles of influenza A virus membrane-associated proteins in assembly and morphology. *J. Virol.* **89**, 8957–8966 (2015).
20. Ruigrok, R. W. H. et al. Membrane interaction of influenza virus M1 protein. *Virology* **267**, 289–298 (2000).
21. Bourmakina, S. V. & García-Sastre, A. Reverse genetics studies on the filamentous morphology of influenza A virus. *J. Gen. Virol.* **84**, 517–527 (2003).
22. Elleman, C. J. & Barclay, W. S. The M1 matrix protein controls the filamentous phenotype of influenza A virus. *Virology* **321**, 144–153 (2004).
23. Burleigh, L. M., Calder, L. J., Skehel, J. J. & Steinhauer, D. A. Influenza A viruses with mutations in the M1 helix six domain display a wide variety of morphological phenotypes. *J. Virol.* **79**, 1262–1270 (2005).
24. Shishkov, A. et al. Spatial structure peculiarities of influenza A virus matrix M1 protein in an acidic solution that simulates the internal lysosomal medium. *FEBS J.* **278**, 4905–4916 (2011).
25. Chiang, M.-J. et al. Maintaining pH-dependent conformational flexibility of M1 is critical for efficient influenza A virus replication. *Emerg. Microbes Infect.* **6**, e108 (2017).
26. Dahmani, I., Ludwig, K. & Chiantia, S. Influenza A matrix protein M1 induces lipid membrane deformation via protein multimerization. *Biosci. Rep.* **39**, BSR20191024 (2019).
27. Zhang, X. et al. Atomic model of a nonenveloped virus reveals pH sensors for a coordinated process of cell entry. *Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol.* **23**, 74–80 (2016).
28. Li, Z. & Blissard, G. W. Autographa californica multiple nucleopolyhedrovirus GP64 protein: roles of histidine residues in triggering membrane fusion and fusion pore expansion. *J. Virol.* **85**, 12492–12504 (2011).
29. Calder, L. J. & Rosenthal, P. B. Cryomicroscopy provides structural snapshots of influenza virus membrane fusion. *Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol.* **23**, 853–858 (2016).
30. Gui, L., Ebner, J. L., Mileant, A., Williams, J. A. & Lee, K. K. Visualization and sequencing of membrane remodeling leading to influenza virus fusion. *J. Virol.* **90**, 6948–6962 (2016).

Publisher's note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020

Methods

No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample size. The experiments were not randomized and investigators were not blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment.

Cell lines

Human embryonic kidney 293-T (HEK293T) and Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells were cultured in cell culture medium: Dulbecco's modified Eagle medium (DMEM) Glutamax (Gibco) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin. HEK293T cells are known to be commonly misidentified cell lines. In this study, HEK293T cells were used as they are a well-established tool for the expression of influenza VLPs; the cells themselves were not studied.

Preparation of HK68 virus samples

Initial virus stocks of A/Hong Kong/1/1968 (H3N2) (HK68) influenza A virus, generated by reverse genetics as previously described [31], were amplified in MDCK cells [32]. All experiments with HK68 virus were carried out under BSL-2 conditions. In preparation for cell seeding, QF AU-200 mesh R2/2 grids (Quantifoil) were glow-discharged and placed into a well of a 6-well tissue culture plate that contained 2 ml of cell culture medium, for at least 1 h before cell seeding. One hundred and fifty thousand MDCK cells diluted in cell culture medium were seeded per well, and incubated at 37°C 5% CO₂, 100% humidity for 12 h to 24 h until cells were adhered to electron microscopy grids. Wells were washed with 0.3% BSA in DMEM before inoculation with diluted virus at a multiplicity of infection of 1. Cells were incubated with virus for 1 h, gently shaking every 15 min. After 1 h, the inoculum was removed and replaced with 0.3% BSA/DMEM containing 0.5 μg/ml to 5 μg/ml TPCK-treated trypsin, depending on trypsin activity. Infection was stopped when cytopathic effect was visible by light microscopy, typically 24 h to 48 h after infection. Grids were removed from cell culture medium, and 5 μl of 1:3 diluted 10-nm colloidal gold in PBS was added to each grid before plunge-freezing by back-side blotting using a Leica GP cryo plunger (Leica).

Preparation of HK68 HANAM1M2 VLP samples

The sequences of HK68 HA, HK68 NA, HK68 M1 and HK68 M2, cloned into pCAGGS expression vectors as previously described [19], were used for the production of HK68 VLP samples. VLP samples were prepared equivalently to HK68 virus samples. Three hundred thousand HEK293-T cells were seeded per well with grids present inside the well. When cells were adhered to electron microscopy grids (typically 12–24 h after seeding), cells were cotransfected with the four plasmids in the ratio 1:1:2:0.5 for HA, NA, M1 and M2, using the transfection reagent FUGENE (Promega) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Forty-eight hours after transfection, grids were removed from cell culture medium and plunge-frozen as described in ‘Preparation of HK68 virus samples’.

Cryo-ET

Collection of cryo-ET data was performed as previously described [33]. Tilt series were acquired on a Titan Krios (Thermo Fisher, formerly FEI) operated at 300 kV equipped with a Gatan Quantum 967 LS energy filter using a 20-eV slit in zero-loss mode. Images were recorded on a Gatan K2-Summit direct electron detector with a pixel size of 1.78 Å or 1.7 Å at the specimen level. Tomograms were acquired from –60° to 60° with a 3° increment and a dose-symmetric tilt scheme [34] using SerialEM-3.49 [35], with defoci between –2 μm and –6 μm. Twenty frames were aligned using the alignframes function in the IMOD 4.10 software package [36]. If data were collected in super-resolution mode, frames were Fourier cropped to 4,000 × 4,000-pixel images. The contrast-transfer function (CTF) for each tilt image was determined on non-exposure filtered tilt stacks using CTFFIND4 [37] and evaluated for each image. Tilt images were exposure filtered according to the accumulated dose applied to the sample for each tilt as previously described [38], using Matlab (MathWorks) or the dose-weight filtering options in alignframes function in IMOD 4.10. Tilt series were aligned using the etomo interface of IMOD based on gold fiducials. Tomograms with less than three trackable fiducials were discarded. Tilt images were CTF-multiplied and reconstructed by weighted back-projection using NovaCTF [39]. Tomograms were subsequently isotropically binned by a factor of two and by a factor of four (referred to as bin2 and bin4 tomograms in the following). Detailed imaging parameters per dataset are summarized in Extended Data Table 1. Tomograms were visualized either in IMOD or UCSF Chimera 1.13.1 [40].

Subtomogram averaging

Tomograms that were acquired at an underfocus range from 1 μm to 4 μm were used for subtomogram averaging. Data from HK68 virus tomograms and HK68 HANAM1M2 VLP tomograms were processed using essentially the same strategy.

Subtomogram averaging was performed using scripts in Matlab (MathWorks) on the basis of functions from the AV3 [41], TOM [42] and Dynamo [43] software packages. To determine initial positions and orientations for subtomogram extraction, the central axis of each virus or VLP filament was marked in bin4 tomograms using the volume tracer function in UCSF Chimera and fitted with a spline function. A tubular grid of points was generated at the radial position of the matrix layer, centred on this spline, with a grid spacing of two bin4 pixels (approximately 1.5 nm). This generated 20,000–35,000 positions per filament. Overlapping cubic subtomograms with a box size of 64 pixels (46 nm) were extracted at these grid positions. Initial Euler angles were assigned on the basis of the orientation of the normal vectors relative to the tube surface at each grid position. For HK68 virus data, subtomograms were split into two independent data half sets, on the basis of their location in either the upper or the lower part of each filament, before starting any subtomogram averaging or alignment.

Subtomograms for each filament were averaged to generate starting references, and then iteratively, rotationally and translationally aligned and averaged at bin4, and then at bin2 (in 96-pixel boxes) to generate low-resolution structures of the M1 layer for each filament. Structures from individual filaments differed in radius and the number of helix starts (Extended Data Fig. 1). M1 subtomograms extracted from four filaments with the same parameters (three helix starts, right-handed M1 layers) were combined. For VLP data, subtomograms were divided into two half sets, on the basis of their location in either the upper or the lower part of each filament, after assignment of helix start number, and further processing was performed independently for the two half sets. Subtomograms were re-extracted at bin1 (in 120-pixel boxes) and final iterations of alignment were performed applying a bandpass filter from 8 Å to 35 Å. The NTD and CTD layers were subsequently refined independently using the final alignment parameters and masks that focused on the respective layer.

For HK68 virus data, the missing wedge was modelled at all processing stages as the sum of the amplitude spectra of subtomograms extracted from regions of each tomogram containing empty ice, and was applied during alignment and averaging. For VLP data, this wedge was applied from bin1; a binary wedge was used at earlier alignment stages.

For each of the refined layers, we assessed the regularity of the local packing and the quality of alignment by plotting the distribution of positions of all neighbouring subtomograms for each M1 position in a so-called ‘neighbour plot’ as previously described [44]. The peaks corresponding to the positions of neighbours in the helical lattice were elliptical and extended along the tube surface, perpendicular to the tube axis (the y direction). This observation suggests either higher variability in the position of neighbours in this direction, or lower accuracy of alignment in this direction. We selected the subsets of M1 monomers in which at least three neighbouring M1 monomers

were found within defined spheres centred on the peak neighbour position. This step reduced resolution anisotropy and retained about 50% of subtomograms. The cleaned, refined maps of the NTD and CTD layers were then recombined into the final structure (Fig. 1, Extended Data Fig. 2). Density maps were visualized in IMOD or UCSF Chimera.

### Directional resolution measurements

Anisotropy in resolution was assessed by calculating the Fourier shell correlation (FSC) within cones of $40^\circ$ using 3DFSC${}^{45}$. Local and global resolution measurements and the determination of a global $B$-factor were performed in RELION by FSC between the two independent half datasets within a smooth-edged mask including the M1 layer. Final structures were sharpened using the determined $B$-factor and filtered according to the determined global resolution ${}^{46}$.

### Structure fitting and modelling based on the M1 in situ structure

The crystal structure of the M1 NTD determined at neutral pH, (PDB code 1EA3) ${}^{13}$ was fitted as a rigid body into the subtomogram-averaging structure using the fit in map functionality in UCSF Chimera. The lengths of CTD $\alpha$-helix-like densities were measured in UCSF Chimera and cylinders of the measured length were placed into the density to illustrate the secondary structure of the M1 CTD.

### Expression and purification of M1 for NMR measurements

For NMR, *Escherichia coli* Rosetta 2 (DE3) bacteria (Merck Millipore) transformed with the pET21b (Merck Millipore) vector carrying the coding sequence of wild-type PR8 M1 were grown in 99.9% ${}^2\mathrm{H}_2\mathrm{O}$ (cor- tecnet) M9 medium, containing 5.4 g/l $\mathrm{Na}_2\mathrm{HPO}_4$ (anhydrous), 2.7 g/ l $\mathrm{KH}_2\mathrm{PO}_4$ (anhydrous), 0.45 g/l $\mathrm{NaCl}$, 1.5 g/l yeast nitrogen base (YNB) (Sigma-Aldrich Y1251), 3.5 g/l ${}^{13}\mathrm{C}$, ${}^2\mathrm{H}$-glucose (Sigma-Aldrich 552151) and 1g/l ${}^{15}\mathrm{NH}_4\mathrm{Cl}$ (Sigma-Aldrich 299251). Before large-scale expression, cells were adapted for growth in deuterated medium on M9 medium agar plates (1.5% w/v) containing 10, 44 and 78% ${}^2\mathrm{H}_2\mathrm{O}$.

The isotopically labelled M1 protein was purified as stated in ‘Protein production and in vitro assembly of M1 helical tubes’, in citrate buffer ($50 \, \mathrm{mM}$ citrate pH 5, $50 \, \mathrm{mM} \, \mathrm{NaCl}$) and subjected to additional cation exchange chromatography using a HiTrap SP HP column (GE lifesciences) to remove unbound bacterial DNA. The eluted M1 protein was buffer-exchanged into $50 \, \mathrm{mM}$ citrate buffer ($\mathrm{pH} \, 5$, $50 \, \mathrm{mM} \, \mathrm{NaCl}$), concentrated to $2 \, \mathrm{mg/ml}$ (about $150 \, \mu \mathrm{M}$) and $5 \% \, {}^2\mathrm{H}_2\mathrm{O}$, $0.02 \% \, \mathrm{NaN}_3$ (Sigma Aldrich) and $0.25 \, \mathrm{mM} \, 4,4$-dimethyl-$4$-silapentane-$1$-sulfonic acid (DSS) were added.

### NMR

All NMR experiments on PR8 M1 were carried out at $25^\circ \mathrm{C}$ on a Bruker Avance II+ 700 MHz spectrometer equipped with a triple resonance TCI cryo-probe. From 1D experiments, the side-chain deuteration level was estimated to be above $90 \%$. For the backbone chemical shift assignment, we recorded nonlinear sampled transverse relaxation-optimized spectroscopy (TROSY) ${}^{47}$ versions of ${}^1\mathrm{H}-{}^{15}\mathrm{NHSQC}$ (full sampling), HNCO, HN(CA)CO, HNCA, HN(CO)CA, HNCACB, HN(CO)CACB, CC(CO)NH and (H)N(COCA)NNH spectra. The spectra were processed and/or reconstructed using either nmrPipe ${}^{48}$, TOPSPIN 4.0.8 or compressed sensing implemented in qMDD (mddnmr) ${}^{49}$. Backbone resonance assignments were performed using ccpnmr ${}^{50}$. Ca, C$\beta$ and C’ secondary chemical shifts were calculated using random coil chemical shifts provided in a previous publication ${}^{51}$. Extended Data Figure 4 was prepared using Graphpad Prism 8.

The pH titration was performed on a non-deuterated sample. We recorded ${}^1\mathrm{H}-{}^{15}\mathrm{NHSQCs}$, and X-STE diffusion experiments at pH points $5, 5.5, 6, 6.5, 7, 7.5, 8, 9$ and $10$.

${}^{15}\mathrm{N}$-edited ${}^1\mathrm{H}$ heteronuclear stimulated-echo longitudinal encode-decode diffusion experiments (X-STE) incorporating bipolar pulse paired gradients ${}^{52}$ were used to measure diffusion coefficients of exclusively ${}^{15}\mathrm{N}$-labelled species, using a diffusion delay $\delta$ of $100 \, \mathrm{ms}$ and

2 × 2-ms gradient pairs $\delta$ for encoding and decoding, respectively. Peak intensities $I_0, I_j$ at multiple gradient strengths ($5-85 \%$ of the maximum allowed gradient strength) were integrated and the diffusion coefficient was calculated using the Stejskal–Tanner equation, in which $I_0$ corresponds to the peak intensity observed at the weakest gradient strength and $I_j$ the peak intensity at a given gradient strength $G$ in Gauss × cm${}^{-1}$, with $\tau$ corresponding to the gradient recovery delay and $\gamma$ to the ${}^1\mathrm{H}$ gyromagnetic ratio

$$
I_j = I_0 e^{-G^2 \delta^2 \gamma^2 \left[ \Delta - \left( \frac{\delta}{3} \right) - \left( \frac{\tau}{2} \right) \right] D}
$$

The hydrodynamic radius was calculated according to the Stokes-Einstein equation $R_h = kT / (6 \pi \eta D)$, in which $k$ is the Boltzmann constant, $T$ the absolute temperature and $\eta$ the solvent viscosity. Theoretical radii of hydration were calculated in HYDROPRO (version 10) ${}^{53}$ based on the PDB files of the isolated NTD and the full-length protein.

### Protein production and in vitro assembly of M1 helical tubes

Full-length A/Puerto Rico/8/1934 (H1N1) (PR8) M1cDNA with Arg134Lys substitution was cloned into pET21b resulting in a C-terminal extension LEHHHHHH. The Arg134Lys substitution, which also occurs naturally in M1, was found to improve sample homogeneity during tube assembly, perhaps by slowing polymerization. Protein was expressed by $0.1 \, \mathrm{m IPTG}$ induction in Rosetta 2 (DE3) cells at $37^\circ \mathrm{C}$ for $3 \, \mathrm{h}$ in LB medium. Cells were pelleted and lysed in Tris-saline ($50 \, \mathrm{mM} \, \mathrm{Tris-HCl} \, \mathrm{pH} \, 8.0$, $150 \, \mathrm{mM} \, \mathrm{NaCl}$) in the presence of $0.1 \%$ Triton X-100 and $0.1 \, \mathrm{mg/ml}$ egg-lysozyme. The lysate was layered over a $60 \%$ sucrose cushion made in Tris-saline and supplemented with $0.1 \%$ Triton X-100 and centrifuged in a SW-32 rotor for $30 \, \mathrm{min}$ at $25,000 \, \mathrm{rpm}$. The insoluble pellet from the centrifugation step was found to contain mostly M1 and negative-stain electron microscopy showed that it exists as aggregated tubular structures (Extended Data Fig. 5a). Insoluble M1 pellet was resuspended in citrate buffer ($50 \, \mathrm{mM}$ citrate $\mathrm{pH} \, 4.6$, $50 \, \mathrm{mM} \, \mathrm{NaCl}$), and after centrifugation at $20,000 \, \mathrm{g}$ for $10 \, \mathrm{min}$, soluble M1 was located in the supernatant. To assemble M1 into tubes, solubilized M1 was mixed with a purified $6.4$-kb size plasmid DNA in a w/ratio of $1:2.5$ and adjusted to an M1 protein concentration of $0.1 \, \mathrm{mg/ml}$ in glycine saline ($100 \, \mathrm{mM}$ glycine $\mathrm{pH} \, 10$, $150 \, \mathrm{mM} \, \mathrm{NaCl}$). The tube assembly reaction was carried out at $21^\circ \mathrm{C}$ for $16 \, \mathrm{h}$ and checked by negative-stain electron microscopy (Extended Data Fig. 5b).

### In vitro helical tube cryo-EM sample preparation

C-Flat 2/2-3C grids (Protochips) were glow-discharged for $30 \, \mathrm{s}$ at $25 \, \mathrm{mA}$, and a $5 \, \mu \mathrm{l}$ sample of the tube assembly reaction was applied $3$ times to the grid with $30 \, \mathrm{s}$ incubation and blotting between each sample application. Grids were washed with $5 \, \mu \mathrm{l} \, \mathrm{H}_2\mathrm{O}$ before blotting and plunge-freezing in liquid ethane using an FEI Vitrobot. Grids were stored in liquid nitrogen until imaging. Imaging was performed on an FEI Titan Krios operated at $300 \, \mathrm{kV}$, equipped with a Gatan K2-summit direct detector using a $20 \, \mathrm{eV}$ slit width operated in zero-loss mode. We acquired $2,347,200$ images using SerialEM-3.7.0 ${}^{35}$, with a nominal magnification of $105,000 \times$, giving a pixel size of $1.128 \, \AA$ at the specimen level.

### Two-dimensional cryo-EM image processing

All super-resolution frames were corrected for gain reference, binned by a factor of $2$, motion-corrected and dose-weighted using MOTIONCOR2 ${}^{54}$. Aligned, non-dose-weighted micrographs were then used to estimate the CTF using CTFFIND4 ${}^{37}$.

Filaments were picked manually, and segments were extracted using a box size of $564 \, \AA$ and an inter-box distance of $33 \, \AA$, obtaining $463,152$ helical segments. Reference-free 2D classification was carried out in RELION 3.0.8 ${}^{55}$. Two-dimensional classes with clear structural features were selected, resulting in $297,183$ helical segments. Analysis of selected 2D class averages using segclassexam in the Spring package ${}^{56}$ revealed that tube diameters varied between $315$ and $350 \, \AA$. The

most abundant classes (those with diameters between 327 and 329 Å, as measured by segclassexam) were selected in RELION resulting in 61,058 helical segments. Using one 2D class average with minimal out-of-plane tilt (Extended Data Fig. 5d), segclassreconstruct within Spring was used to test possible helical parameters, identifying a pitch of about 100 Å and 27.8, 29.8, 31.8 or 28.2, 30.2, 32.2 subunits per turn. These helical parameters were tested in RELION 3D refinement, and 32.2 subunits per turn as an initial helical parameter resulted in a density showing protein features; the refined pitch was 99.8 Å and 32.4 subunits per turn. Three-dimensional classification using a mask focusing on the central 50% of the M1 helical tube further reduced heterogeneity in diameter: the best 3D class contained 17,984 helical segments and was used for final 3D auto-refinement and Bayesian polishing in RELION<sup>57</sup>.

Overall resolution estimates were calculated from FSCs at 0.143 criterion between two independently refined half-maps, using phase-randomization to correct for any convolution effects of the generous, soft-edged solvent mask focusing on the central 25% of the helix (that is, about 1.4 helical turns). Final reconstructions were sharpened using standard post-processing procedures in RELION, resulting in a B-factor of −115 Å² (Extended Data Table 2). Helical symmetry was imposed on the post-processed maps using the relion_helix_toolbox<sup>58</sup>.

### Model building and refinement

The N-terminal fragment crystal structure (PDB code 1AA7<sup>12</sup>) was fitted into the sharpened 3.8 Å map and residues were manually adjusted; C-terminal domain residues were built manually in Coot-0.9<sup>59</sup>. The final model contains residue 2–252, the N-terminal methionine is removed by cellular methionine aminopeptidase and the density for the C-terminal tag is present but poorly defined for model building. Steric clash and side-chain rotamer conformations were improved using the Namdinator web server<sup>60</sup>. After further manual adjustment, the structure was refined in PHENIX-1.18.2<sup>61</sup> in the presence of riding hydrogen atoms to good geometry with no Ramachandran outliers, giving an EMRinger<sup>62</sup> score of 3.0. Statistics are given in Extended Data Table 2.

### Sequence alignment

M1 sequences of the following viruses: influenza A M1 PR8 (A/Puerto Rico/8/1934 (H1N1)), influenza A M1 HK68 (A/Hong Kong/1/1968 (H3N2)), influenza A M1 (A/chicken/Fujian/25/2000 (H9N2)), bat influenza M1 H17N10 (A/little yellow-shouldered bat/Guatemala/164/2009 (H17N10)), bat influenza M1 H18N11 (A/flat-faced bat/Peru/033/2010 (H18N11)) and influenza B M1 (B/Lee/1940) were downloaded from UniProt and aligned using mafft 7 (https://mafft.cbrc.jp/alignment/software/).

### Reporting summary

Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this paper.

### Data availability

The cryo-EM and cryo-ET structures, and representative tomograms are deposited in the Electron Microscopy Data Bank (EMDB) under accession codes EMD-11075, EMD-11076, EMD-11077, EMD-11078 and EMD-11079. The associated molecular models are deposited in the PDB under accession codes 6Z5J and 6Z5L. Protein structures from published work that were used in this study are available in the PDB under accession codes: 1AA7, 1EA3, 5WCO and 5V6G. Sequences used in this study are available from UniProt.

---

31. Martínez-Sobrido, L. & García-Sastre, A. Generation of recombinant influenza virus from plasmid DNA. *J. Vis. Exp.* **42**, 2057 (2010).
32. Tobita, K., Sugiura, A., Enomote, C. & Furuyama, M. Plaque assay and primary isolation of influenza A viruses in an established line of canine kidney cells (MDCK) in the presence of trypsin. *Med. Microbiol. Immunol. (Berl.)* **162**, 9–14 (1975).
33. Wan, W. et al. Structure and assembly of the Ebola virus nucleocapsid. *Nature* **551**, 394–397 (2017).
34. Hagen, W. J. H., Wan, W. & Briggs, J. A. G. Implementation of a cryo-electron tomography tilt-scheme optimized for high resolution subtomogram averaging. *J. Struct. Biol.* **197**, 191–198 (2017).
35. Mastronarde, D. N. Automated electron microscope tomography using robust prediction of specimen movements. *J. Struct. Biol.* **152**, 36–51 (2005).
36. Kremer, J. R., Mastronarde, D. N. & McIntosh, J. R. Computer visualization of three-dimensional image data using IMOD. *J. Struct. Biol.* **116**, 71–76 (1996).
37. Rohou, A. & Grigorieff, N. CTFFIND4: fast and accurate defocus estimation from electron micrographs. *J. Struct. Biol.* **192**, 216–221 (2015).
38. Grant, T. & Grigorieff, N. Measuring the optimal exposure for single particle cryo-EM using a 2.6 Å reconstruction of rotavirus VP6. *eLife* **4**, e06980 (2015).
39. Turoňová, B., Schur, F. K. M., Wan, W. & Briggs, J. A. G. Efficient 3D-CTF correction for cryo-electron tomography using NovaCTF improves subtomogram averaging resolution to 3.4 Å. *J. Struct. Biol.* **199**, 187–195 (2017).
40. Pettersen, E. F. et al. UCSF Chimera—a visualization system for exploratory research and analysis. *J. Comput. Chem.* **25**, 1605–1612 (2004).
41. Förster, F., Medalia, O., Zauberman, N., Baumeister, W. & Fass, D. Retrovirus envelope protein complex structure in situ studied by cryo-electron tomography. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **102**, 4729–4734 (2005).
42. Nickell, S. et al. TOM software toolbox: acquisition and analysis for electron tomography. *J. Struct. Biol.* **149**, 227–234 (2005).
43. Castaño-Díez, D., Kudryashev, M., Arheit, M. & Stahlberg, H. Dynamo: a flexible, user-friendly development tool for subtomogram averaging of cryo-EM data in high-performance computing environments. *J. Struct. Biol.* **178**, 139–151 (2012).
44. Kovtun, O. et al. Structure of the membrane-assembled retromer coat determined by cryo-electron tomography. *Nature* **561**, 561–564 (2018).
45. Tan, Y. Z. et al. Addressing preferred specimen orientation in single-particle cryo-EM through tilting. *Nat. Methods* **14**, 793–796 (2017).
46. Rosenthal, P. B. & Henderson, R. Optimal determination of particle orientation, absolute hand, and contrast loss in single-particle electron cryomicroscopy. *J. Mol. Biol.* **333**, 721–745 (2003).
47. Pervushin, K. Impact of transverse relaxation optimized spectroscopy (TROSY) on NMR as a technique in structural biology. *Q. Rev. Biophys.* **33**, 161–197 (2000).
48. Delaglio, F. et al. NMRPipe: a multidimensional spectral processing system based on UNIX pipes. *J. Biomol. NMR* **6**, 277–293 (1995).
49. Mayzel, M., Rosenlöw, J., Isaksson, L. & Orekhov, V. Y. Time-resolved multidimensional NMR with non-uniform sampling. *J. Biomol. NMR* **58**, 129–139 (2014).
50. Vranken, W. F. et al. The CCPN data model for NMR spectroscopy: development of a software pipeline. *Proteins* **59**, 687–696 (2005).
51. Schwarzinger, S. et al. Sequence-dependent correction of random coil NMR chemical shifts. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* **123**, 2970–2978 (2001).
52. Ferrage, F., Zoonens, M., Warschawski, D. E., Popot, J.-L. & Bodenhausen, G. Slow diffusion of macromolecular assemblies by a new pulsed field gradient NMR method. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* **125**, 2541–2545 (2003).
53. García de la Torre, J., Huertas, M. L. & Carrasco, B. Calculation of hydrodynamic properties of globular proteins from their atomic-level structure. *Biophys. J.* **78**, 719–730 (2000).
54. Zheng, S. Q. et al. MotionCor2: anisotropic correction of beam-induced motion for improved cryo-electron microscopy. *Nat. Methods* **14**, 331–332 (2017).
55. Zivanov, J. et al. New tools for automated high-resolution cryo-EM structure determination in RELION-3. *eLife* **7**, e42166 (2018).
56. Desfosses, A., Ciuffa, R., Gutsche, I. & Sachse, C. SPRING—an image processing package for single-particle based helical reconstruction from electron cryomicrographs. *J. Struct. Biol.* **185**, 15–26 (2014).
57. Zivanov, J., Nakane, T. & Scheres, S. H. W. A Bayesian approach to beam-induced motion correction in cryo-EM single-particle analysis. *IUCrJ* **6**, 5–17 (2019).
58. He, S. & Scheres, S. H. W. Helical reconstruction in RELION. *J. Struct. Biol.* **198**, 163–176 (2017).
59. Emsley, P., Lohkamp, B., Scott, W. G. & Cowtan, K. Features and development of Coot. *Acta Crystallogr. D* **66**, 486–501 (2010).
60. Kidmose, R. T. et al. Namdinator - automatic molecular dynamics flexible fitting of structural models into cryo-EM and crystallography experimental maps. *IUCrJ* **6**, 526–531 (2019).
61. Afonine, P. V. et al. Real-space refinement in PHENIX for cryo-EM and crystallography. *Acta Crystallogr. D* **74**, 531–544 (2018).
62. Barad, B. A. et al. EMRinger: side chain-directed model and map validation for 3D cryo-electron microscopy. *Nat. Methods* **12**, 943–946 (2015).
63. Das, S. C. et al. The highly conserved arginine residues at positions 76 through 78 of influenza A virus matrix protein M1 play an important role in viral replication by affecting the intracellular localization of M1. *J. Virol.* **86**, 1522–1530 (2012).
64. Baudin, F., Petit, I., Weissenhorn, W. & Ruigrok, R. W. In vitro dissection of the membrane and RNP binding activities of influenza virus M1 protein. *Virology* **281**, 102–108 (2001).
65. Zhang, K. et al. Two polar residues within C-terminal domain of M1 are critical for the formation of influenza A virions. *Cell. Microbiol.* **17**, 1583–1593 (2015).
66. Wu, C. Y., Jeng, K. S. & Lai, M. M. C. The SUMOylation of matrix protein M1 modulates the assembly and morphogenesis of influenza A virus. *J. Virol.* **85**, 6618–6628 (2011).

Acknowledgements We thank V. Sonntag-Buck, V. Zila, P. Chlanda, S. Klein, D. Morado, S. Scheres, C. Yu, C.-Y. Huang and W. Hagen for technical assistance, and P. Rosenthal, S. Gamblin, J. Skehel and D. Veesler for support during the preparation of helical arrays. All NMR data were acquired at the MRS facility of the MRC-LMB. This study made use of electron microscopes at EMBL and the MRC-LMB EM Facility, as well as high-performance computing resources at EMBL and LMB and the CLID CL2 imaging facility; we thank the staff who maintain these resources. Funding was provided to J.A.G.B. by the European Research Council (ERC)

Article

under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (ERC-CoG-648432 MEMBRANEFUSION), the Medical Research Council (MC_UP_1201/16) and the European Molecular Biology Laboratory; and to J.A.G.B. and H.G.K. by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (project number 240245660-SFB1129).

Author contributions X.X., H.G.K. and J.A.G.B. conceived the project. X.X. designed and performed in vitro helical assembly of M1. L.J.C. contributed to the initial identification of helical arrays. X.X., S.E. and S.M.V.F. designed and performed NMR experiments. J.P. and J.A.G.B. designed virus and VLP experiments, which were performed by J.P. O.S. and S.K. performed preliminary sample preparation and structural characterization of M1. J.P., X.X. and K.Q. collected cryo-EM and cryo-ET data. J.P. processed cryo-ET data with assistance from W.W. and J.A.G.B. X.X. processed cryo-EM data with assistance from K.Q. and J.A.G.B. J.P., X.X., S.E. and J.A.G.B. interpreted data. J.P., X.X. and J.A.G.B. wrote the original draft, which was edited and reviewed by all authors. J.A.G.B. and H.G.K. obtained funding. J.A.G.B. supervised and managed the project.

Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.

Additional information

Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2696-8.

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to X.X. or J.A.G.B.

Peer review information *Nature* thanks John L. Rubinstein and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are available.

Reprints and permissions information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints.

Extended Data Fig. 1 | HK68 virions and VLPs have variable numbers of M1 strands and variable radius. a, Slices through tomograms of two HK68 virus filaments, superimposed with a visualization of M1 subtomogram positions and orientations. Separate M1 strands are shown in different colours. Left, M1 arranged as three parallel left-handed helical strands. Right, M1 arranged as six parallel right-handed helical strands. Scale bars, 20nm. Morphology is representative of three independent preparations of virus. b, As in a but for HK68VLP filaments. Morphology is representative of five independent preparations of VLPs. c, Histogram showing the distribution of the number of helical strands (#helix starts) for all HK68 virus (white) and VLP (grey) filaments analysed. Right-handed helices have positive start numbers, and left-handed helices have negative start numbers. d, Histogram showing the distribution of filament radii for all HK68 virus and VLP filaments analysed. Radii were determined at the position of the M1NTD. e, A scatter plot of the number of helical strands against filament radius for each filament characterized in n=52 virions from 1 representative preparation of virus, and n=22 VLPs from 1 representative preparation of VLPs.

Article

Extended Data Fig. 2 | Comparison of HK68 virus and VLP M1 structures, and resolution measurements.

a, Representative orthoslice through a HK68 virus tomogram. Scale bar, 50 nm. Morphology is representative of three independent preparations of virus.

b, Projection through 1.8 nm of the M1 subtomogram average obtained from HK68 virus data.

c, Global FSC curve for the structure of M1 from HK68 virus (black), and analysis of anisotropy by FSC curves in x, y, and z directions (blue, green, and red, respectively).

d–f, As in a–c, for VLP data. Morphology is representative of five independent preparations.

g, The structure of M1 from HK68 virus derived from subtomogram averaging, shown as a pink isosurface and fitted with the M1 NTD crystal structure. Cylinders represent the secondary structure elements of the M1 CTD.

h, As in g, but for the subtomogram averaging structure of M1 from VLPs. We did not observe density that might correspond to the cytoplasmic tail of HA.

i, FSC calculated between the virus M1 and VLP M1 structures, indicating that the structures are the same up to a resolution of 9 Å.

Extended Data Fig. 3 | Analysis of the M1 structure determined within virions and VLPs. **a**, Overlay of the model of M1 subunits as they are arranged in virions and VLPs with two neighbouring M1 NTD domains (pink) within the crystal packing in PDB 1EA3<sup>13</sup>. Inset highlights the positions of the interhelix loops (L). **b**, Model of M1 subunits as they are arranged in virions and VLPs, shown in three different orientations (as in Fig. 2b). **c**, Surface charge representation for the NTD in equivalent orientations to those shown in **a**, coloured from negative (red) to positive (blue). Charged residues that form interstrand interfaces, and their respective helix numbers, are marked in the top and bottom panels. Basic residues shown in Fig. 2c and involved in membrane interaction are marked in the middle panel. Mutation of residues 77 and 78 to alanine reduces M1 incorporation into virions<sup>63</sup>. **d**, Overlay of the M1 model with two neighbouring infectious salmon anaemia virus matrix proteins (magenta) from the crystal packing in PDB 5WCO<sup>15</sup>. The difference in orientation of the CTD could reflect differences in influenza A virus or infectious salmon anaemia virus virion morphology, but we consider it more likely that it reflects the sequence divergence between infectious salmon anaemia virus and influenza A virus.

Article

Extended Data Fig. 4 | NMR analysis of M1.a, ${}^{1}$H-${}^{15}$N HSQC spectrum of full-length M1 at pH 5. The spectrum is representative of three independent sample preparations.b, Representative diffusion curves acquired at pH 5 and 7, and fitted diffusion coefficients and calculated radii of hydration at pH values 5, 6, 7, 8 and 10. Error bars indicate the uncertainties of the intensities of the picked peak using Bruker Dynamics Center 2.6.1. HYDRO PRO ${}^{53}$ calculated radii of hydration are listed below for comparison.c, ${}^{1}$H-${}^{15}$N HSQC spectra of full-length M1 at different pH values. Increasing pH in absence of DNA and membrane does not induce folding of the CTD. At high pH (>8), only resonances from the first part of the NTD are visible. The protein remains largely monomeric throughout the pH titration.d, Secondary chemical shifts analysis. When compared to random coil, positive Ca and negative CB chemical shifts designate α-helical secondary structure. α-Helical segments from the single-particle structure are depicted above for comparison. Missing assignments are indicated by blue dots.

Extended Data Fig. 5 | Electron microscopy of in vitro-reconstituted M1 helical tubes.

a, Negative-stain image of aggregated M1 tubes found within the pellet after sucrose cushion centrifugation.

b, Negative-stain image of an in vitro-assembled M1 tube in the presence of nucleic acid. Images in a, b are representative of at least five independent preparations.

c, A typical cryo-EM image of in vitro assembled M1 tubes at 2.7 μm underfocus, representative of three independent preparations.

d, Selected class averages with tube diameter between 327–329 Å as determined by segclassexam. The lower left class average has minimal out-of-plane tilt and was used to test possible helical parameters by segclassreconstruct.

e, Cryo-EM density of an M1 monomer is shown; the surface is coloured by local resolution of the map as determined by RELION. Boxes indicate regions magnified in g–i.

f, Global FSC curve of the final in vitro-assembled M1 tube helical reconstruction (Fig. 2d).

g–i, Magnified regions of cryo-EM density as indicated in e and their fitted molecular models.

Article

Extended Data Fig. 6 | Analysis of the in vitro M1 structure. **a**, A view of M1 monomers extracted from the helical reconstruction to show the sites of interaction with the two nucleic acid strands (Fig. 2). One nucleic acid strand binds at the NTD–NTD interface (yellow), the other binds to a groove formed at the CTD–CTD interface (pink). Residues interacting with nucleic acid are all positively charged and are shown as sticks. Residues that form part of the nuclear localization signal that was previously shown to bind the viral ribonucleoprotein<sup>64</sup> are underlined. **b**, Alignment of in situ (blue) and in vitro (green) M1 dimers extracted from their respective linear polymers. The differences are limited to small movements at the interfaces, perturbations in the orientation of α-helix 9 that accommodate the different curvatures, and a small change in the orientation of α-helix 12. It is possible that these differences reflect differences between spherical PR8 virions and filamentous HK68 virions, but we think it is more likely that they reflect the different curvature and the presence of nucleic acid in the in vitro sample. Inset highlights selected residues in the CTD. The mutations Ser183Ala and Thr185Ala cause spherical influenza A virus WSN to make more filamentous particles<sup>65</sup>. We speculate that these mutations may modulate folding of the CTD. Residue 204 is Glu in filamentous Udorn and HK68, but is Asp in spherical WSN, and the mutation Glu204Asp reduces the number of long filaments<sup>21</sup>. This residue is close to the C-terminal end of the neighbouring CTD and we speculate that this difference may influence this interaction. Residue 242 can be sumoylated<sup>66</sup>. This residue faces the inside of the virion where sumoylation could be accommodated without altering M1 packing. **c**, Alignment of the full-length M1 structure determined by helical reconstruction (green) to crystal structures of M1 NTD: PDB1AA7 (blue)<sup>12</sup>, PDB1EA3 (yellow)<sup>13</sup> and PDB5V6G (cyan)<sup>14</sup>. The structures are the same except for small differences in the H4–H5 loop.

Influenza AM1PR8
M S L L T E V E T Y V L S I P S G P L K A E I A Q R L E D 30
Influenza AM1HK68
M S L L T E V E T Y V L S I V P S G P L K A E I A Q R L E D 30
Influenza AM1 (A/chicken/Fujian/25/00H9N2)
M S L L T E V E T Y V L S I P S G P L K A E I A Q R L E D 30
Bat influenza M1H17N10
M S I L T E V E T Y V L S I P S G P L K A D I A Q K L E D 30
Bat influenza M1H18N11
M S I L T E V E T Y V L S I P S G P L K A E I A Q K L E D 30
Influenza BM1
M S L F G D T I A Y L L S L I E D G E G K A E L A E K L H C

Helix 1
Helix 2

Influenza AM1PR8
V F A G K N T D L E V L M E W I K T R P I L S P L T K G I 60
Influenza AM1HK68
V F A G K N T D L E A L M E W L K T R P I L S P L T K G I L
Influenza AM1 (A/chicken/Fujian/25/00H9N2)
V F A G K N T D L E A L M E W L K T R P I L S P L T K G I L
Bat influenza M1H17N10
V F S G R N S D L D T L L E W L K A R P I L S P L T K G I V
Bat influenza M1H18N11
V F S G R N S D L D T L L E W L K T R P I L S P L T K G I V
Influenza BM1
W F G G K E F D L D S A L E W I K N K R C L T D I Q K A L I

Helix 3
Helix 4

Influenza AM1PR8
G F V F T L T V P S E R G L Q R R R F V Q N A L N G N G D P 90
Influenza AM1HK68
G F V F T L T V P S E R G L Q R R R F V Q N A L N G N G D P
Influenza AM1 (A/chicken/Fujian/25/00H9N2)
G F V F T L T V P S E R G L Q R R R F V Q N A L N G N G D P
Bat influenza M1H17N10
G F V F T L T V P C E K G A P R R K F I Q T A L N G N G E A
Bat influenza M1H18N11
G F V F T L T V P C E K N T S R R K F I Q T A L N G N G E T
Influenza BM1
G A S I C F L K P K D Q E R K R R F I T E P L S G M G T T

Helix 5

Influenza AM1PR8
N N M D K A V K L Y R K L K R E I T F G A K K E I S L S Y 119
Influenza AM1HK68
N N M D R A V K L Y R K L K R E I T F G A K K E I A L S Y
Influenza AM1 (A/chicken/Fujian/25/00H9N2)
N N M D R A V K L Y K K L K R E M T F G A K K E V A L S Y
Bat influenza M1H17N10
A N M D K A V K I Y K K L K K E I T F G A K K E V A L S Y
Bat influenza M1H18N11
A N M D K A V K I Y K K L K K E I T F G A K K E V A L S Y
Influenza BM1
A T K K K G L I L A E R K M R C V S F E A F E I A E G H

Helix 6
Helix 7
110
113

Influenza AM1PR8
S A G A L A S C M G L I Y N R M G A V T T E V A F G L V C A 149
Influenza AM1HK68
S A G A L A S C M G L I Y N R M G A V T T E V A F G L V C A
Influenza AM1 (A/chicken/Fujian/25/00H9N2)
S T G A L A S C M G L I Y N R M G T V T T E V A F G L V C A
Bat influenza M1H17N10
P T G A L A C C M G L I Y N R M G S V T T E V A F G L V C A
Bat influenza M1H18N11
P T G A L A C C M G L I Y N R M G S V T T E V A F G L V C A
Influenza BM1
E S S A L L Y C L M V M Y L N P E N Y S M Q V K L G T L C A

Helix 8
Helix 9

Influenza AM1PR8
T C E Q I A D S Q H R S H R Q M V T T T N P L I R H E N R M 179
Influenza AM1HK68
T C E Q I A D S Q H H R S H R Q M V T T T N P L I R H E N R M
Influenza AM1 (A/chicken/Fujian/25/00H9N2)
T C E Q I A D S H H R S H R Q M A T T T N P L I R H E N R M
Bat influenza M1H17N10
T C E H I A D S Q Y R S H R Q M I S T N P L I R H E N R M
Bat influenza M1H18N11
T C E H I A D S Q R S H K Q M V G S T N P L I R H E N R M
Influenza BM1
L C E K Q A S H S A R A A R S S V P G V R E M Q M
153
157 158 159 160
162 163
174 175

Helix 10

Influenza AM1PR8
V L A S T T A K A M E Q M A G S S E Q A A E A M E V A S Q A 209
Influenza AM1HK68
V L A S T T A K A M E Q M A G S S E Q A A E A M E V A S Q A
Influenza AM1 (A/chicken/Fujian/25/00H9N2)
V L A S T T A K A M E Q M A G S S E Q A A E A M E V A S Q A
Bat influenza M1H17N10
A T A A S T A K A M E Q M A S S S E Q A A E A M E I A S Q A
Bat influenza M1H18N11
A T A A S T A K A M E Q M A S S S D Q A A E A M E I A S Q A
Influenza BM1
V S A M N T A K T M N G M G . . . K G E D V Q R L A E E
205

Helix 11

Influenza AM1PR8
R Q M V Q A M R T I G T H P S S S A G L K N D L L E N L Q A 239
Influenza AM1HK68
R Q M V Q A M R A I G T H P S S S A G L K D D L L E N L Q A
Influenza AM1 (A/chicken/Fujian/25/00H9N2)
R Q M V Q A M R T I G T Q P S S S A G L K D D L I E N L Q A
Bat influenza M1H17N10
R Q M I Q A M R A I G T H P T T S S S G L K D D L L D N L Q A
Bat influenza M1H18N11
R Q M I Q A M R A I G T T P T T S S S G L K D D L L D N L Q A
Influenza BM1
Q N N I G V L R S L G A S Q K N G E G I A K D V M E V L K .
222
230

Helix 12

Influenza AM1PR8
Y Q K R M G V Q M Q R F K . . . 252
Influenza AM1HK68
Y Q K R R M G V Q M Q R F K . . . 252
Influenza AM1 (A/chicken/Fujian/25/00H9N2)
Y Q K R R M G V Q M Q R F K . . . 252
Bat influenza M1H17N10
Y Q K R M G I Q M Q R F K . . . 252
Bat influenza M1H18N11
Y Q K R M G I Q M Q R F K . . . 252
Influenza BM1
Q S S M G N S A L V R K Y L 248

Extended Data Fig. 7 | Alignment of M1 protein sequences. M1 sequences of the following viruses: influenza AM1PR8 (A/Puerto Rico/8/1934 (H1N1)), influenza AM1HK68 (A/Hong Kong/1/1968 (H3N2)), influenza AM1 (A/chicken/Fujian/25/2000 (H9N2)), bat influenza M1H17N10 (A/little yellow-shouldered bat/Guatemala/164/2009 (H17N10)), bat influenza M1H18N11 (A/flat-faced bat/Peru/033/2010 (H18N11)), influenza BM1 (B/Lee/1940) were downloaded from UniProt and aligned using mafft (https://mafft.cbrc.jp/alignment/) . Locations of α-helices 1–12 are marked above the amino acid sequences. Conserved histidines are shaded blue, and conserved charged residues are shaded cyan. Substituted histidine locations and compensatory histidine substitutions are shaded red.

Article

Extended Data Table 1 | Data collection and processing parameters for M1 within virions and VLPs

| Data collection and processing | Influenza A/HK68 virus | Influenza A/HK68 HANAM1M2VLP |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Magnification | 81,000X | 81,000X |
| Voltage (keV) | 300 | 300 |
| Detector | Gatan Quantum K2 | Gatan Quantum K2 |
| Energy-filter | Yes | Yes |
| Slit width (eV) | 20 | 20 |
| Pixel size (Å) | 1.70 | 1.78 |
| Defocus range (µm) | 1.5 to 4.5 | 2 to 6 |
| Defocus step (µm) | 0.25 | 0.25 |
| Tilt range (min/max, step) | -60/60°, 3° | -60/60°, 3° |
| Tilt scheme | Dose-symmetrical (Hagen scheme) | Dose-symmetrical (Hagen scheme) |
| Total Dose (electrons/Å²) | ~130-150 | ~120 |
| Frame number | 20 | 20 |
| Tomograms used for M1/acquired | 53/105 | 20/60 |
| Tomograms/viruses used for final structure | 5 | 4 |
| Final subtomograms set A NTD/CTD | 6025/5934 | 6936/7164 |
| Final subtomograms set B NTD/CTD | 6149/6147 | 7611/7822 |
| Symmetry imposed | none | none |
| B-factor | -620 | -665 |
| Map resolution isotropy (Å) at 0.143FSC threshold | 5.8-15 | 6.8-9.8 |
| Global resolution (Å) at 0.143FSC threshold | 7.6 | 8.2 |

Extended Data Table 2 | Data collection and processing parameters for in vitro helical assembly of M1

M1 helical assembly  
(EMDB-11079)  
(PDB6Z5L)

**Data collection and processing**

- Magnification: 105000
- Voltage (kV): 300
- Electron exposure (e-/Å²): 47.1
- Defocus range (µm): 1 to 3
- Pixel size (Å): 1.128
- Symmetry imposed: D1 helical
- Initial particle images (no.): 463152
- Final particle images (no.): 17984
- Map resolution (Å; FSC=0.143): 3.81
- Helical rise (Å): 3.08
- Helical twist (°): 11.11

**Refinement**

- Initial model used (PDB code): 1AA7
- Model resolution (Å) (FSC=0.5): 3.90
- Map sharpening B factor (Å²): -115

**Model composition**

- Non-hydrogen atoms: 1937
- Protein residues: 251

**B factors (Å²)**

- Protein: 96.4

**R.m.s. deviations**

- Bond lengths (Å): 0.005
- Bond angles (°): 1.010

**Validation**

- MolProbity score: 1.30
- Clashscore: 1.79
- Poor rotamers (%): 0

**Ramachandran plot**

- Favored (%): 94.78
- Allowed (%): 5.52
- Disallowed (%): 0

# Reporting Summary

Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see [Authors & Referees](https://www.nature.com/nature-research/editorial-policies/authors-referees) and the [Editorial Policy Checklist](https://www.nature.com/nature-research/editorial-policies/editorial-policy-checklist).

## Statistics

For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.

- [ ] The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
- [ ] A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
- [ ] The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
  - Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
- [ ] A description of all covariates tested
- [ ] A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
- [ ] A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g., means) or other basic estimates (e.g., regression coefficient)
  - AND variation (e.g., standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g., confidence intervals)
- [ ] For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g., F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom, and P value noted
  - Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
- [ ] For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
- [ ] For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
- [ ] Estimates of effect sizes (e.g., Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated

Our web collection on [statistics for biologists](https://www.nature.com/collections/qghlrg) contains articles on many of the points above.

## Software and code

Policy information about [availability of computer code](https://www.nature.com/nature-research/editorial-policies/computer-code)

### Data collection

SerialEM 3.49 and 3.7 for operation of electron microscope (available and referenced in the Methods section)

TOPSPIN 4.0.8 software for operation of Bruker Avance II+ 700 MHz spectrometer (referenced in the Methods section)

### Data analysis

CryoEM data processing (all available and referenced in methods): CTFFIND4; MotionCor2; SPRING 0.86; RELION 3.

CryoET data processing (all available and referenced in methods): CTFFIND4; IMOD 4.10; NovaCTF (no version numbering); Matlab R2016b; 3DFSC v3.0.

Subtomogram averaging (all available and referenced in methods): Matlab R2016b using published scripts (Wan et al. Nature, 2017) based on AV3, TOM, and Dynamo (v.1.1.226) packages. Minor modifications to these scripts, as well as simple "tool scripts" such as those used for analyzing neighbor positions, are not published but are available from the authors.

NMR data processing (all available and referenced in methods): nmrPipe 9.7, TOPSPIN 4.0.8 and qMDD (mddnmr) 3.2, ccpnmr analysis 2.4.2, HYDROPRO version 10, Bruker Dynamics Center 2.6.1, Graphpad Prism 8.

Modelling/structure refinement/visualization (all available and referenced in methods): Coot 0.9; Namdinator (no version numbering); PHENIX 1.18.2; Chimera 1.13.1

Sequence alignment: mafft 7 ([https://mafft.cbrc.jp/alignment/software/](https://mafft.cbrc.jp/alignment/software/)).

For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers. We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g., GitHub). See the Nature Research [guidelines for submitting code & software](https://www.nature.com/nature-research/editorial-policies/submission-guidelines-for-code-and-software) for further information.

# Data

Policy information about [availability of data](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41597-023-02688-8)

All manuscripts must include a [data availability statement](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41597-023-02688-8). This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:

- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability

A data availability statement is included:

Data availability: The cryo-EM and cryo-ET structures, and representative tomograms are deposited in the Electron Microscopy Data Bank (EMDB) under accession codes EMD-11075, EMD-11076, EMD-11077, EMD-11078 and EMD-11079. The associated molecular models are deposited in the protein data bank (PDB) under accession codes 6Z5J and 6Z5L. Protein structures from published work that were used in this study are available in the PDB under accession codes: 1AA7, 1EA3, 5WCO, and 5V6G. Sequences used in this study are available from Uniprot.

---

# Field-specific reporting

Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.

- ☑ Life sciences
- ☐ Behavioural & social sciences
- ☐ Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences

For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see [nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf](https://www.nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf)

---

## Life sciences study design

All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.

### Sample size

For cryoEM and cryoET: Sample sizes were determined by available electron microscopy time and density of filaments on electron microscopy grids. The sample size is sufficient to obtain a structure at the reported resolution.

For protein sequence analyses: sample sizes were restricted by the number of available M1 sequences available in NCBI.

For NMR: No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample size. Number of scans in each NMR experiment was chosen to obtain best possible signal-to-noise ratio for the allocated NMR time.

### Data exclusions

For cryoET

Tomograms exhibiting errors during data collection or insufficient fiducials for alignment were excluded. All tomograms containing filamentous virions/VLPs were analysed. Structure determination was performed using filaments exhibiting the most abundant helical parameters from tomograms with a defocus < 4 μm. Misaligned subtomograms were excluded from averages based on cross-correlation scores and analysis of packing regularity as described in the methods. Exclusions are described in methods sections, and in Extended Data Table 1. Exclusion of error-containing or misaligned data is standard (pre-established) for cryoET data processing.

For cryoEM

Data were excluded using standard classification approaches in RELION to remove false picks and poorly resolved helical segments. Further segments were excluded based on heterogeneity of diameter identified in SPRING. We did not observe classes that might represent alternative structures. Further segments were discarded based on heterogeneity identified in 3D classification. All exclusions are described in the Methods section and in Extended Data Table 2. Exclusion of mis-picked or misaligned data is standard (pre-established) for cryoEM data processing.

For NMR

No data were excluded from the analyses.

### Replication

For cryoET

Structures were determined from independent half datasets, which were compared to assess the resolution of the reconstruction, as described in the methods section. Sample preparation and morphology determination was performed for at least 3 independent preparations of each sample.

For cryoEM

Structures were determined from independent half datasets, which were compared to assess the resolution of the reconstruction. Both half-set replicates were the same to the stated resolution. Three attempts at replicating sample preparation were successful, although sample quality varied.

For NMR

HSQC, HNCO and HNCA spectra could be successfully replicated across three independent sample preparations.

### Randomization

For cryoET

Division of dataset into two random halves was done based on the location of the subtomogram in either the upper or the lower half of the filament.

For CryoEM

Division of datasets into two random halves was done based on standard approach in RELION 3.

For NMR  
Samples were not randomized for NMR analysis.

Blinding  
Blinding was not applicable to this study because this type of study does not use group allocation.

# Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods

We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material, system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.

## Materials & experimental systems

- [ ] Antibodies
- [ ] Eukaryotic cell lines
- [ ] Palaeontology
- [ ] Animals and other organisms
- [ ] Human research participants
- [ ] Clinical data

## Methods

- [ ] ChIP-seq
- [ ] Flow cytometry
- [ ] MRI-based neuroimaging

## Eukaryotic cell lines

Policy information about [cell lines](cell_lines)

### Cell line source(s)
Human embryonic kidney 293-T (HEK293T) and Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) were both from ATCC.

### Authentication
All Cell lines were used without authentication.

### Mycoplasma contamination
All Cell lines were NOT tested for Mycoplasma contamination.

### Commonly misidentified lines (See [ICLAC](ICLAC) register)
HEK derivatives. HEK293T cells were used in this study as they are well-established tools for the expression of influenza VLPs: the cells themselves were not studied.
