
Journal Pre-proof

Molecular architecture of the SARS-CoV-2 virus

Hangping Yao, Yutong Song, Yong Chen, Nanping Wu, Jialu Xu, Chujie Sun, Jiaxing Zhang, Tianhao Weng, Zheyuan Zhang, Zhigang Wu, Linfang Cheng, Danrong Shi, Xiangyun Lu, Jianlin Lei, Max Crispin, Yigong Shi, Lanjuan Li, Sai Li

PIL: S0092-8674(20)31159-4  
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.09.018  
Reference: CELL 11618  

To appear in: Cell  

Received Date: 12 July 2020  
Revised Date: 10 August 2020  
Accepted Date: 3 September 2020  

Please cite this article as: Yao, H., Song, Y., Chen, Y., Wu, N., Xu, J., Sun, C., Zhang, J., Weng, T., Zhang, Z., Wu, Z., Cheng, L., Shi, D., Lu, X., Lei, J., Crispin, M., Shi, Y., Li, L., Li, S., Molecular architecture of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, *Cell* (2020), doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.09.018.

This is a PDF file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance, such as the addition of a cover page and metadata, and formatting for readability, but it is not yet the definitive version of record. This version will undergo additional copyediting, typesetting and review before it is published in its final form, but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article. Please note that, during the production process, errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

© 2020 Elsevier Inc.

the authentic SARS-CoV-2 virus

Membrane

RNP hexon
the "Eggs-in-a-nest"

90°

RNP tetrahedron
the "Pyramid"

RNP

Prefusion
RBD down S
the "Flail"

Postfusion S
the "Needle"

Membrane

Molecular architecture of the SARS-CoV-2 virus

Hangping Yao${}^{1,2,9}$, Yutong Song${}^{3,4,9}$, Yong Chen${}^{3,4,9}$, Nanping Wu${}^{1,2,9}$, Jialu Xu${}^{3,4,5,9}$, Chujie Sun${}^{3,4,5}$, Jiaxing Zhang${}^{3,4}$, Tianhao Weng${}^{1,2}$, Zheyuan Zhang${}^{3,4}$, Zhigang Wu${}^{1,2}$, Linfang Cheng${}^{1,2}$, Danrong Shi${}^{1,2}$, Xiangyun Lu${}^{1,2}$, Jianlin Lei${}^{3,4}$, Max Crispin${}^{6}$, Yigong Shi${}^{3,4,5,7,8}$, Lanjuan Li${}^{1,2,*}$ and Sai Li${}^{3,4,5,10,*}$

${}^{1}$State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310003, Zhejiang Province, China

${}^{2}$National Clinical Research Center for Infectious Diseases, First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310003, Zhejiang Province, China

${}^{3}$School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China

${}^{4}$Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Structural Biology & Frontier Research Center for Biological Structure, Beijing 100084, China

${}^{5}$Tsinghua University-Peking University Joint Center for Life Sciences, Beijing 100084, China

${}^{6}$School of Biological Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton SO17 1BJ, UK

${}^{7}$Key Laboratory of Structural Biology of Zhejiang Province, School of Life Sciences, Westlake University, 18 Shilongshan Road, Hangzhou 310024, Zhejiang Province, China

${}^{8}$Institute of Biology, Westlake Institute for Advanced Study, 18 Shilongshan Road, Hangzhou 310024, Zhejiang Province, China

${}^{9}$These authors contributed equally

${}^{10}$Lead Contact

*Correspondence: sai@tsinghua.edu.cn (S.L.), ljli@zju.edu.cn (L.L.)

SUMMARY

SARS-CoV-2 is an enveloped virus responsible for the COVID-19 pandemic. Despite recent advances in the structural elucidation of SARS-CoV-2 proteins, detailed architecture of the intact virus remains to be unveiled. Here we report the molecular assembly of the authentic SARS-CoV-2 virus using cryo-electron tomography (cryo-ET) and subtomogram averaging (STA). Native structures of the S proteins in both pre- and postfusion conformations were determined to average resolutions of 8.7–11 Å. Compositions of the N-linked glycans from the native spikes were analyzed by mass-spectrometry, which revealed highly similar overall processing states of the native glycans to that of the recombinant glycoprotein glycans. The native conformation of the ribonucleoproteins (RNP) and its higher-order assemblies were revealed. Overall, these characterizations have revealed the architecture of the SARS-CoV-2 virus in exceptional detail, and shed lights on how the virus packs its ~30 kb long single-segmented RNA in the ~80 nm diameter lumen.

Journal Pre-proof

# INTRODUCTION

As of August 31st, 2020, a total of over 25 million cases of COVID-19 were reported and more than 850 thousand lives were claimed globally (https://covid19.who.int). The causative pathogen, Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), is a novel β-coronavirus (Lu et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2020). SARS-CoV-2 encodes at least 29 proteins in its (+) RNA genome, four of which are structural proteins: the spike (S), membrane (M), envelope (E) and nucleocapsid (N) proteins (Kim et al., 2020).

The ~600 kDa, trimeric S protein, one of the largest known class-I fusion proteins, is heavily glycosylated with 66 N-linked glycans (Walls et al., 2020; Watanabe et al., 2020a; Wrapp et al., 2020). Each S protomer comprises the S1 and S2 subunits, and a single transmembrane (TM) anchor (Wrapp et al., 2020). The S protein binds to the cellular surface receptor angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 (ACE2) through the receptor binding domain (RBD), an essential step for membrane fusion (Hoffmann et al., 2020; Lan et al., 2020; Shang et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020; Yan et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2020). The activation of S requires cleavage of S1/S2 by furin-like protease and undergoes the conformational change from prefusion to postfusion (Belouzard et al., 2009; Kirchdoerfer et al., 2018; Simmons et al., 2004; Simmons et al., 2013; Song et al., 2018). Several prefusion conformations have been resolved for the S protein, wherein the three RBDs display distinct orientations, “up” or “down” (Walls et al., 2020; Wrapp et al., 2020). The receptor binding sites expose, only when the RBDs adopt an ‘up’ conformation. The “RBD down”, “one RBD up” and “two-RBD up” conformations have been observed in recombinantly expressed S proteins of SARS-CoV-2 (Henderson et al., 2020; Walls et al., 2020; Wrapp et al., 2020). Upon activation, S follows a classic pathway among class-I fusion proteins (Rey and Lok, 2018): it undergoes dramatic structural rearrangements involving shedding its S1 subunit and inserting the fusion peptide (FP) into the target cell membrane (Cai et al., 2020). Following membrane fusion, S transforms to a needle-shaped postfusion form, having three helices entwining coaxially (Cai et al., 2020). Despite the efforts in elucidating the SARS-CoV-2 virus host recognition and entry mechanism at near-atomic resolution using recombinant proteins, high-resolution information regarding the *in situ* structures and landscape of the authentic virus is in-demand.

Coronavirus has the largest genome among all RNA viruses. It is enigmatic how the N protein oligomerizes, organizes, and packs the ~30 kb long single-stranded RNA in the viral
lumen. Early negative-staining electron microscopy of coronaviruses showed single-strand helical RNPs with a diameter of ~15nm (Caul and Eggleston, 1979). Cryo-ET of SARS-CoV revealed that RNPs organized into lattices underneath the envelope at ~4-5nm resolution (Neuman et al., 2006). However, such ultrastructure was not observed in the Mouse hepatitis virus (MHV), the prototypic β-coronavirus (Barcena et al., 2009). No molecular model exists so far for the coronavirus RNP, and little is known about the architecture, assembly and RNA packaging of the RNPs of other (+) RNA viruses.

To address these questions, we combined cryo-ET and STA for the imaging analysis of 2,294 intact virions propagated from an early viral strain (Yao et al., 2020). To our knowledge, this is the largest cryo-ET data set of SARS-CoV-2 virus to date. Here we report the architecture and assembly of the authentic SARS-CoV-2 virus.

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

### Molecular landscape of the SARS-CoV-2 virus.

SARS-CoV-2 virions (ID: ZJU_5) were collected on January 22<sup>nd</sup>, 2020, from a patient with severe symptoms, and were propagated in Vero cells. The patient was infected during a conference with attendees from Wuhan (Yao et al., 2020). For cryo-EM analysis, the viral sample was fixed by paraformaldehyde, which has minor effects on protein structure at 7-20 Å resolution (Li et al., 2016; Wan et al., 2017). Intact and unconcentrated virions were directly visualized from the supernatant by cryo-EM, showing both ellipsoidal and spherical enveloped particles (Figure S1A), consistent with the observation on virions concentrated by ultracentrifugation through sucrose cushion (Figure S1B). We modelled 2,294 virions as ellipsoids by meshing their lipid envelopes, measuring average diameters of 64.8±11.8, 85.9±9.4 and 96.6±11.8 (average±S.D.) nm for the short, medium and long axis of the envelope respectively. S proteins and RNPs (Figures 1A, S1B and S5A) represented the most distinctive features of the virus. A comprehensive analysis has been carried out on the data. In total, 56,832 spikes were manually identified from the virions, approximately 97% of which are in the prefusion conformation, 3% in the postfusion conformation (Method details). An average of 26±15 prefusion S were found randomly distributed on each virion (Figures 1B-C). The spike copy number per virion is comparable to HIV (Liu et al., 2008), but ~5 times less than the Lassa virus (LASV) (Li et al., 2016) or ~10 times less than the Influenza
virus (Harris et al., 2006). 18,500 RNPs were manually identified in the viral lumen (Table S1), giving an average of 26±11 RNPs per virion. However, since the viral lumen is tightly packed with RNPs and electron opaque, the actual number of RNPs per virion was estimated to be 20-30% more, i.e. 30-35 RNPs per virion. Regularly ordered RNP ultrastructures were occasionally observed (Figure S5A), indicating the RNPs could form local assemblies.

Two conformations of the prefusion S, namely the RBD down and one RBD up conformations from inactivated SARS-CoV-2 virions were classified and reconstructed to 8.7 Å and 10.9 Å resolution by STA, with local resolution reaching 7.8 Å (Figures S3A-S3C). The heptad repeat 1 (HR1) and central helix (CH) domains of the S2 subunits represent the best resolved domains (Figure S3D). The proportion of RBD down conformation among all prefusion S was estimated to be 54% per virion (Figure 1C). The membrane proximal stalk of S represented the poorest resolved region with a local resolution of ~20 Å, showing no trace of the TM or membrane in the structure (Figure 1D). When the tomogram slices were scrutinized, spike populations that either stand perpendicular to or lean towards the envelope were observed, suggesting that the TM was averaged out in the map.

Refined orientations of the prefusion S showed they rotate around their stalks almost freely outside the envelope, leaning at an average angle of 40°±20° relative to the normal axis of the envelope (Figures 1B and 1D). The rotational freedom of spikes is allowed by its low population density, which is prominently distinct from other enveloped viruses possessing class-I fusion proteins (Harris et al., 2006; Li et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2008). Interestingly, a minor population of Y-shaped spikes pair having two heads and one combined stem were observed (Figures S2A and S2C), which possibly represent spikes intertwined with their stems. These observations suggest that the SARS-CoV-2 spikes possess unusual freedom on the viral envelope. Such unique features may facilitate the virus in exploring the surrounding environment and better engaging with the cellular receptor ACE2, allowing multiple spikes to bind with one ACE2 or one spike with multiple ACE2 simultaneously. However, the sparsely packed spikes on the viral envelope are also more vulnerable to neutralizing antibodies that bind the otherwise less accessible domains (Chi et al., 2020) or glycan holes (Walls et al., 2019). Our observations on the structures and landscape of the intact SARS-CoV-2 are consistent with two other cryo-ET studies appeared at the same period (Turoňová, 2020; Ke et al., 2020).

Native structures of S in the prefusion conformation.
The native structures of S in the RBD down and one RBD up conformations were similar to the rigidly fitted recombinant protein structures (PDB: 6XR8 and 6VYB) (Cai et al., 2020; Walls et al., 2020), except for the N terminus domain (NTD). Comparison between the rigidly and flexibly fitted PDB: 6XR8 suggested that the NTD on the native spike structure shifted 9 Å (centroid distance) away from S2 (Figure S3E). The slight dilation and lower local resolution (Figures S3A and S3B) of the NTD on the native spike against recombinant spike structures was also observed on the other cryo-ET structures (Ke et al., 2020). It is known that NTD exhibits certain mobility as a rigid body (Cai et al., 2020; Walls et al., 2020; Wrapp et al., 2020; Xiong et al., 2020). It is possible that through large date set and classification, the near-atomic resolution cryo-EM reconstruction of the spike represents its metastable conformation, while the cryo-ET reconstructions represent an average of various dynamic states of the NTD.

Ten N-linked glycans are visible on the RBD down and seven on the one RBD up conformations, of which N61, N282, N801, N1098 and N1134 were best resolved. Interestingly, densities for glycans N1158 and N1173/N1194 are visible on the stem of the spike (Figures 2B and S4C). In general, the glycan densities observed on the native spike fit well with the full-length recombinant structure (Cai et al., 2020), however they are bulkier than observed in the TM truncated recombinant spikes (Walls et al., 2020; Wrapp et al., 2020). Similar observations were reported by two studies of the native spike structures appeared at the same period (Turoňová, 2020; Ke et al., 2020).

We further determined the native glycan identity by analyzing the virus sample using mass-spectrometry (MS). The viral particles, with or without PNGase F digestion, were resolved on SDS-PAGE. After PNGase F treatment, the S1 and S2 subunits were reduced by ~30 kDa and ~20 kDa, respectively, in weight (Figure 2C). The bands corresponding to S1 and S2 before PNGase F treatment were analyzed by MS to reveal the glycan compositions at each of the 22 glycosylation sites (Figures 2D and S4B). The overall processing states of the native glycans are highly similar to that of the recombinant glycoprotein glycans (Figures S4A and S4B) (Watanabe et al., 2020a), a feature shared with MERS and SARS-CoV (Walls et al., 2019). Populations of under-processed oligomannose-type glycans are found at the same sites as seen in the recombinant material, including at N234 where the glycan is suggested to have a structural role (Casalino et al., 2020). However, as is observed at many sites on HIV (Cao et al., 2018; Struwe et al., 2018), the virus exhibits somewhat lower levels
of oligomannose-type glycosylation compared to the recombinant, soluble mimetic. Overall, the presence of substantial population of complex-type glycosylation suggests that the budding route of SARS-CoV-2 into the lumen of endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi intermediate compartments (ERGIC) is not an impediment to glycan maturation and is consistent with both analysis of SARS-CoV glycans (Ritchie et al., 2010) and the identification of neutralizing antibodies targeting the fucose at the N343 glycan on SARS-CoV-2 (Pinto et al., 2020). Furthermore, the lower levels of oligomannose-type glycans compared to HIV and LASV are also consistent with lower glycan density (Watanabe et al., 2020b; Watanabe et al., 2018). Comparing the structures between our native prefusion S to the recombinant ones, we conclude that 1) the N-linked glycans present on the native spike are bulkier and contain elevated levels of complex-type glycans; 2) the recapitulation of the main features of native viral glycosylation by soluble, trimeric recombinant S glycoprotein is encouraging for vaccine strategies utilizing recombinant S protein.

Native structure of S in the postfusion conformation.

Apart from the triangular prefusion S, needle-like densities were occasionally observed on the viral envelope (Figure S2B). A 15.3 Å resolution structure was solved and well fitted with a postfusion form of S (PDB: 6XRA), suggesting a postfusion conformation of the S protein. The ectodomain measures 22.5 nm in length, 6 nm in width and stands perpendicular to the viral envelope. Densities of five N-linked glycans (N1098, N1074, N1158, N1173 and N1194) are displayed on the spike (Figure 3D), reminiscent to the recombinant postfusion structures (Cai et al., 2020; Fan et al., 2020). In comparison to the prefusion conformation, the fixation in orientation to the envelope suggests a dramatic conformational reordering of the stem region to achieve the postfusion conformation. The postfusion S were found only on a small fraction of the viruses (18% of all viruses, each carried an average of 5 postfusion S), hindering us from reaching higher resolutions. Interestingly, among postfusion S-carrying virions, the virions possessing less spikes in total tend to have higher proportion of postfusion S (Figure 3C). Statistics on the refined coordinates (Figures 3A-3C) suggested a tendency of the postfusion S to bundle on the viral surface. One such bundle was reconstructed, showing four postfusion S spaced by ~10 nm on the viral surface (Figure 3B), compared to ~15 nm average distance between the nearest prefusion S.

Distinguished from the SARS-CoV virus, which was estimated to possess an average of ~50-100 spikes per virion (Neuman et al., 2011), the SARS-CoV-2 virus possesses approximately
half of the prefusion S and occasionally some postfusion S. The postfusion S observed on the SARS-CoV-2 virus may come from 1) products of occasional, spontaneous dissociation of S1 (Cai et al., 2020), which was cleaved by host proteinases; 2) syncytium naturally formed on infected cells (Xia et al., 2020), when budding progeny virions carried a few residual postfusion S from the cell surface; 3) sample preparation procedure, as cryo-EM images of β-propiolactone fixed viruses showed most spikes present on the virus are postfusion-like (Liu et al., 2020; Gao et al., 2020). Such instability of the prefusion S was reported on the other β-coronaviruses (Pallesen et al., 2017). In addition, the distribution graph (Figure 3C) implies that the kinetically trapped prefusion S is more fragile than the postfusion S, and could even dissociate from the virus. The speculation is based on the fact that intracellular virions possess more spikes on average (Klein et al., 2020) than the extracellular virions reported by us and the others (Turoňová, 2020; Ke et al., 2020), and the occasional observation of the spike-less “bald” virus in our data.

In summary, we speculate that the SARS-CoV-2 prefusion S are unstable, indicating that the distribution of solvent exposed epitopes on the virions is more complicated than the observations on the recombinant proteins. Our observation has implications for efficient vaccine design and neutralizing antibody development, which prefer a sufficient number of stable antigens.

### Architecture and assembly of the RNPs in intact virions.

It remains enigmatic how coronaviruses pack the ~30 kb RNA within the ~80 nm diameter viral lumen; if the RNPs are ordered relative to each other to avoid RNA entangling, knotting or even damaging; or if the RNPs are involved in virus assembly. When raw tomogram slices were inspected, densely packed, bucket-like densities were discernible throughout the virus lumen, some of which appeared to be locally ordered (Figure S5A). Combining previous cryo-ET observation on coronaviruses (Barcena et al., 2009) and SDS-PAGE/MS analysis (Figure 2C), the densities most likely belonged to the RNPs.

In total 18,500 RNPs were picked in the viral lumen, and initially aligned using a sphere as the template and a large spherical mask. A bucket-like conformation with little structural feature emerged adjacent to the density for lipid bilayer (Figure S5D), suggesting that a significant number of RNPs were membrane proximal. Alignment using a small spherical mask revealed a 13.1 Å resolution reverse G-shaped architecture of the RNP, measuring 15nm in diameter and 16 nm in height (Figure 4B). Its shape is in good comparison to a recently reported SARS-CoV-2 RNP conformation (Klein et al., 2020), as well as the in situ conformation of the chikungunya viral RNP, which is also positive stranded (Jin et al., 2018), but different from the MHV RNP released using detergent (Gui et al., 2017).

The map was segmented into five head-to-tail reverse L-shaped densities, each fitted with a pair of N proteins (N terminus domain (N_NTD): 6WKP, C terminus domain (N_CTD): 6WJI) dimerized by the N_CTD (Chen et al., 2007) (Figures S6A and S6C). We analyzed the electrostatic potential distribution on the surface of the decamer, and suggested a tentative structural model of RNA winded RNP (Figures S6B and S6D). Interestingly, an early observation on the MHV RNPs showed ~15 nm diameter helices with five subunits per turn (Caul and Eggleston, 1979). Due to the limited resolution and little previous structural knowledge about the (+) RNA virus RNPs, our model shall be interpreted with caution.

Further 2D classification of the RNPs revealed three classes: 1) closely packed against the envelope, 2) hexagonally and 3) triangularly packed RNPs (Figure 4A). Following 3D refinement, a membrane proximal, “eggs-in-a-nest” shaped RNP assembly (referred to as the “hexon”), and a membrane-free, “pyramid” shaped RNP assembly (referred to as the “tetrahedron”) emerged (Figures 4C and S5E-S5G). Projection of the two class averages back onto their refined coordinates revealed that the majority of hexons came from spherical virions, while more tetrahedrons from ellipsoidal virions (Figure 4D). This was quantified by statistics: ellipsoidal virions tend to pack more RNP tetrahedrons (Figure 4E). Furthermore, the spacing between two neighboring RNPs (~18 nm) is the same for both the tetrahedrons and hexons, and some tetrahedrons could assemble into hexons when projected onto their in situ coordinates (Figure S5B), suggesting that the RNP triangle is a key and basic packing unit throughout the virus. We further propose that the RNPs are involved in coronavirus assembly and help strengthen the virus against environmental and physical challenges, as purified virions remained intact after five cycles of freeze-and-thaw treatment (Figure S7). Such involvement of RNPs in viral assembly was also reported by (Neuman et al., 2006), who showed RNPs form a lattice underneath the envelope; as well as seen in intracellular virions (Steffen Klein et al., 2020). However, it remains unanswered if the ultrastructures of RNPs are assembled by RNA, the transmembrane M or E proteins, the RNP itself, or multiples of the above.
Solving RNPs to subnanometer resolution was hindered by the crowding of RNPs against each other (Figures S5E-S5G). Furthermore, structural features of the RNPs on higher order assemblies smeared, possibly due to the symmetry mis-match between individual RNPs and the assembly (Figures 4C and 4D). No virus with strictly ordered RNPs throughout the lumen was found by projections. We conclude that the native RNPs are highly heterogeneous, densely packed yet locally ordered in the virus, possibly interacting with the RNA in a beads-on-a-string stoichiometry.

From ~2,300 intact virions and over 300 tilt series, we provide molecular insights into the structures of spikes in the pre- and postfusion conformations, the RNPs and how they assemble on the authentic virus. We also analyzed the detailed glycan compositions of the native spikes. The reconstructed virus map (Figure 1B) consisting the RBD down S, one RBD up S, lipid envelope and RNP components of the authentic SARS-CoV-2 has been deposited in the Electron Microscopy Data Bank under accession codes EMD-30430, which provide a model for full virus molecular dynamic simulation, 3D printing, education or public media in the future.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

S.L. thank Tsinghua University for providing a Start-up fund, the Tsinghua University Branch of China National Center for Protein Sciences (Beijing) for the cryo-EM facility and the computational facility support, and Dr. Fan Yang, Jie Wen, Danyang Li for technical support. We thank Dr. Haiteng Deng and Chongchong Zhao in the Proteomics Facility at Technology Center for Protein Sciences, Tsinghua University, for protein MS analysis. We thank Tao Yang, Yakun Wang, Anbao Jia on the cluster of Bio-Computing Platform (Tsinghua University Branch of China National Center for Protein Sciences Beijing); and Nvidia for providing the computational facility support. We are in debt to Dr. Hongwei Wang, Dr. Nieng Yan, Dr. Xinquan Wang, Dr. Lingqi Zhang, Dr. Qiang Ding and Dr. Xueming Li for providing critical advices. Funding: This work was supported in part by funds from Major Project of Zhejiang Provincial Science and Technology Department #2020C03123-1, and National Science and Technology Major Project for the Control and Prevention of Major Infectious Diseases in China (#2018ZX10711001, #2018ZX10102001).

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

S.L. conceived and supervised the project. H.Y., N.W., T.W., Z.W., L.C., D.S. and X.L. propagated, fixed and verified the fixation of the virus sample. Y.S. and S.L. isolated the viruses, performed biochemical analysis and prepared the cryo-sample for cryo-EM. Y.S., Y.C., S.L., J.Z. and J.L. collected the EM data. Y.S., Y.C., J.Z., J.X., C.S., Z.Z., and S.L. processed the EM data. S.L. and J.X. performed the subtomogram averaging and classification. Y.C., J.X., S.L. and Y.S. analyzed the structures. C.S., and J.X. performed the statistical analysis. M.C., Y.S. and Z.Z. analyzed the glycan data. S.L., Y.Shi., M.C. and L.L. wrote the manuscript. All authors critically revised the manuscript.

DECLARATION OF INTERESTS

The authors declare no competing interests.

FIGURES

Figure 1. Molecular architecture of the SARS-CoV-2 virus.

(A) A representative tomogram slice (5 Å thick) showing pleomorphic SARS-CoV-2 virions.

(B) A representative virus (boxed in A) is reconstructed by projecting the prefusion S in RBD down conformation (salmon) and one RBD up conformation (red), lipid envelope (grey), and RNPs (yellow) onto their refined coordinates. RNPs away from the envelope are hidden for clarity. The unsolved stem regions of the spikes are sketched from a predicted model (https://zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/COVID-19). (C) Summary of structural observations. Upper: number of prefusion S and RNPs per virion. An average of 26 prefusion S and RNPs are found in a virion; Lower left: ratio of the S proteins between RBD down and one RBD up conformations. An average of 54% prefusion S are in RBD down conformation; Lower right: statistics of the dimension of SARS-CoV-2 viral envelopes. The average diameters for the short, medium and long axis of the envelope are of 64.8, 85.9 and 96.6 nm. Boxplot shows the outliers, minimum, first quartile, medium, third quartile and maximum of the data. (D) Distribution of the spike tilt angle reveals a prevailing tilt of 40° relative to the normal axis of the envelope. Shown here is a representative RBD down spike in authentic orientation to the envelope (grey). The spike is colored by local resolution, and the predicted model of the stem is fitted for illustration purpose. See also Figure S1.

Figure 2. Native structure of the S protein in the prefusion conformation.

(A) S in RBD down (resolution 8.7 Å, threshold: 1.2) and one RBD up (resolution 10.9 Å, threshold: 1.5) conformations. Sideview (upper) and topview (lower) of the maps respectively fitted with PDB entries 6XR8 and 6VYB are shown. (B) The RBD down S maps fitted with PDB entry 6XR8. Densities of ten glycans are highlighted in insets. (C) Compositional analysis of the viral sample. The treated viruses, designated ZJU_5, were resolved by SDS-PAGE and visualized by Coomassie blue staining. Lane (1) protein ladder; (2) purified ZJU_5; (3) ZJU_5 treated with PNGase F and (4) PNGase F as control. After PNGase F treatment, the molecular weight of the S1 subunit is reduced by ~30 kDa, and S2 by ~20 kDa in weight. (D) Compositional analysis of the surface glycans. The identity and proportion of 22 N-linked glycans from the native S glycans were analyzed by mass spectrometry and presented in pie charts. See also Figure S3 and S4.

Figure 3. Native structure of S2 in the postfusion conformation.

(A) A representative tomogram slice (5 nm thick) showing a cluster of spikes in postfusion conformation on a SARS-CoV-2 virion. (B) 3D reconstructions of S2 in postfusion state. The boxed region in (A) is reconstructed by projecting the solved postfusion S structure onto their refined coordinates. Resolution: 15.3 Å, threshold: 1.0. (C) Distribution of the postfusion S. *Left*: Statistics indicate that the postfusion S are closer to each other on the viral surface compared to the prefusion S; *Right*: viruses possessing less spikes in total tend to have more postfusion S (only virions possessing postfusion S were counted). (D) The postfusion S structure fitted with PDB: 6XRA, displaying densities of N1098, N1074, N1158, N1173 and N1194. Density of N1134 is not visible on the map and is colored grey.

Figure 4. Native assembly of the ribonucleoproteins (RNPs).

(A) 2D class averages of RNPs reveal two distinctive types of the RNP ultrastructure: hexameric (boxed in orange) and tetrahedral (boxed in red) assembly. (B) 3D reconstruction and 2D slices of the RNP. Resolution: 13.1 Å, threshold: 1.0. (C) Ultrastructure of the RNP hexon and tetrahedron assemblies. Seven RNPs are packed against the viral envelope (grey), forming an “eggs-in-a-nest” shaped hexagonal assembly (upper). Four RNPs are packed as a membrane-free tetrahedral assembly (lower), most of which were found inside the virus away from the envelope. Structural features of the RNPs on the assembly are smeared due to the symmetry mis-match between individual RNPs and the assembly. (D) Representative projection of the RNP hexons assembling into a spherical virus, and tetrahedrons into an ellipsoidal virus. (E) Statistics of the ratio of tetrahedron/hexon assembly reveals that the spherical and ellipsoidal virions are more likely to be packed with hexons and tetrahedrons, respectively. The ratio is estimated by sorting 382 virions that have over 5 RNP assemblies by their ratio of long/short axis and counting their ratio of tetrahedron to hexon RNPs. Boxplot shows the minimum, first quartile, medium, third quartile and maximum of the data. See also Figure S5, S6 and S7.

Supplemental Figures

Figure S1. Comparison between the unconcentrated and concentrated SARS-CoV-2 virions. Related to Figure 1.

Cryo-electron microscopy of virions present in the supernatant of infected Vero cells (A), and virions concentrated by ultracentrifugation (B), showing both spherical and ellipsoidal particles. The long/short axis ratio, as well as the average diameters of the viral envelope measured from the micrographs, are similar between the concentrated (157 virions) (C) and unconcentrated (113 virions) virions (D).

Figure S2. Example tomogram slices of spikes. Related to Figure 1 and Figure 3.

S in (A) prefusion (5 Å thick) and (B) postfusion (5 nm thick) conformations. (C) A representative pair of Y-shaped spikes in RBD down conformation (marked with * in A) is illustrated by projecting the refined structures onto their coordinates and overlaying with the raw tomogram (lowpassed to 80 Å resolution).

Figure S3. Local resolution and Fourier Shell Correlation (FSC) curves. Related to Figure 2.

(A, B) Maps of prefusion S in RBD down or one RBD up conformations are colored by their local resolution ranging between 7.8-19.8 Å. Among all domains, the central helical (CH) region is the best resolved, as evidenced by tubular densities of the alpha-helix bundles. (C) Resolution of the spikes in RBD down, one RBD up, the postfusion conformations, and the RNP was estimated from the FSC curves, using a criterion 0.143. (D) The best solved domains of the RBD down S, HR1 and CH from the S2 subunit, are highlighted with the fitted PDB: 6XR8. The domains are colored as in the schematic. NTD, N-terminal domain; RBD, receptor binding domain; S1/S2, S1/S2 cleavage site; S2', S2' cleavage site; FP, fusion peptide; HR1, heptad repeat 1; CH, central helix; CD, connector domain; HR2, heptad repeat 2; TM, transmembrane anchor; CT, cytoplasmic tail. (E) Comparison of the rigidly and flexibly fitted PDB: 6XR8 to the RBD down S. The NTD has shifted by 9 Å away from the CH (centroid distance).

Figure S4. N-linked glycans of the native S proteins. Related to Figure 2.

(A) Glycan composition of recombinant S, as reported by (Watanabe et al. 2020a).  
(B) Glycan composition of the native full-length S (Oligomannose: M12-M5; Hybrid: Hybrid, Fhybrid; Complex: A0, FA0, A1, FA1, A2/A1B, FA2/FA1B, A3/A2B, FA3/FA2B, A4/A3B, FA4/FA3B). Please check the attached excel data form for the detailed glycan composition.  
(C) The RBD down S colored by its oligomer subunits. Densities of ten glycans are visible on the map (grey).

Figure S5. Ultrastructure of the RNPs. Related to Figure 4.

(A) Example tomogram slices (lowpassed to 80 Å) of in situ RNP assembly. Thickness of the slice is 5 Å. (B) RNP tetrahedrons are projected onto their coordinates to show their characteristic higher-order organization. (C) An RNP tetrahedron is overlaid with hexon, showing identical spacing between two neighboring RNPs on either of the assembly. (D) Lipid bilayer density appears, when all RNPs are aligned and averaged using a large spherical mask. (E-G) Topview and sideview of the RNP tetrahedron and hexon reconstructions, showing RNPs are tightly packed in the viral lumen.

Figure S6. A tentative model for the SARS-CoV-2 RNP. Related to Figure 4.

(A) Alignment of all single RNPs in regardless of their assembly types using a tight spherical mask revealed a 13.1 Å resolution reverse G-shaped architecture of the RNP, measuring 15 nm in diameter and 16 nm in height. (C) The map was segmented into five head-to-tail reverse L-shaped densities, each fitted with a pair of N (N_NTD: 6WKP, N_CTD: 6WJI) dimerized by the N-CTD, leaving two upper segments unoccupied. Based on the electrostatic potential distribution on the surface of the decamer (B), we propose a tentative model of RNP winded with RNA (D).

Journal Pre-proof

Figure S7. Environmental challenges to the SARS-CoV-2 virions. Related to Figure 4.

(A-C) SARS-CoV-2 virions remained intact after five cycles of freeze-and-thaw treatment, as shown by negative staining microscopy.

STAR METHODS

RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

Lead Contact

Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Sai Li (sai@tsinghua.edu.cn).

Materials Availability

This study did not generate new unique reagents.

Data and Code Availability

Cryo-EM maps of the reported structures have been deposited in the Electron Microscopy Data Bank under accession codes EMD-30426, EMD-30427, EMD-34028, EMD-34029 and EMD-30430. The Gold standard plugin for subtomogram averaging in Dynamo used in this work is available at: https://github.com/SaiLi-Lab/dynamo_gold_standard. Additional Supplemental Items are available from Mendeley Data at http://dx.doi.org/10.17632/5jxts4742j.1.

EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS

Cell lines

The Vero cells (African green monkey kidney, ATCC CCL-81, sex unknown) for virus propagation were cultured at 37°C and 5% CO₂ in Modified Eagle Medium (MEM, Corning) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco) and 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin (Gibco) in T75 culture flask (Grenier). When the cells confluence reached 90%, the cells were harvested with 0.25% Trypsin-EDTA (Gibco) and passaged at a split ratio of 1:4.

# METHOD DETAILS

## Sample preparation

SARS-CoV-2 virions isolated from the patient's sputum (ID: ZJU_5) (Yao et al., 2020) were propagated in Vero cells (ATCC CCL-81). Sputum was diluted by 5 volumes of Modified Eagle Medium (MEM) complete medium supplemented with 2% fetal bovine serum (FBS), Amphotericin B (100 ng/ml), Penicillin G (200 units/ml), Streptomycin (200 μg/ml) and centrifuged to remove impurities at 3000 rpm for 10 min in room temperature. Finally, the supernatant was collected and filtered through a 0.45 μm filter. 3 ml of filtered supernatant was added to Vero cells in a T25 culture flask. After incubation at 35 °C for 2 hours to allow binding, the inoculum was removed and replaced with fresh culture medium. The cells were incubated at 35 °C and observed daily to evaluate cytopathic effects (CPE). The SARS-CoV-2 was tested by qRT-PCR and sequencing. For the preparation of enough virus samples, viruses were proliferated using Vero cells in T75 culture flasks. On four days post-infection, 100 ml cell supernatant was cleared from cell debris at 4,000 g centrifugation for 30 min and inactivated with paraformaldehyde (PFA; final concentration 3%) for 48 hours at 4 °C. The supernatant was kept at 4 °C afterwards. All experiments involving infectious virus were conducted in approved biosafety level (BSL)-3 laboratory.

## Purification, concentration, biochemical analysis and sample preparation for electron microscopy

Purification, concentration, biochemical analysis and sample preparation for electron microscopy of inactivated virions were carried out in a BSL-2 lab. For cryo-ET, the fixed virions were pelleted through 30% sucrose cushion by ultracentrifugation (Beckman, IN) at 100,000 g for 3 hours at 4 °C and resuspended in 60 μl HEPES-saline buffer containing 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.3, 150 mM NaCl at 4 °C overnight (Neuman et al., 2008).

## Deglycosylation and SDS-PAGE

To deglycosylate S protein of virions, 20 μg purified virion sample was treated with 500 units PNGase F (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA) at 37 °C for 1 hour. 20 μg of treated and untreated samples were kept at 100 °C for 15 min. Deglycosylation of S protein was characterized by 4 to 12% NuPAGE™ Bis-Tris gel (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). The protein band was stained by One-Step Blue Protein Gel Stain (Biotium, Fremont, CA).

## Mass spectrometric analysis

For protein identification, the gel bands were excised from the gel, reduced with 5 mM of DTT and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide which was followed by in-gel digestion with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37°C overnight. The sample was quenched by adding 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to adjust the pH to below 2. The peptides were extracted twice with 0.1% TFA in 50% acetonitrile aqueous solution for 1 hour and then dried in a speedVac. Peptides were dissolved in 25 μl 0.1% TFA 6 μl of the extracted peptides was analyzed by Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

MS/MS spectra from each LC-MS/MS run were searched against the SARS-CoV-2 database using Proteome Discoverer (Version 1.4) searching algorithm. The search criteria were as follows: full tryptic specificity was required; two missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications; precursor ion mass tolerance was 20 ppm for all MS acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer; and fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.02 Da for all MS2 spectra acquired in the Orbitrap. High confidence score filter (FDR < 1%) was used to select the “hit” peptides and their corresponding MS/MS spectra were manually inspected.

For glycan analysis, the gel bands corresponding to S protein were treated with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI), chymotrypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) and alpha lytic protease (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) similarly to the above procedures. The extracted peptides was analyzed by Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

For LC-MS/MS analysis, the peptides were separated by a 40 min gradient elution at a flow rate 0.30 μl/min with a Thermo-Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system, which was directly interfaced with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The analytical column was a home-made fused silica capillary column (75 μm ID, 150 mm length; Upchurch, Oak Harbor, WA) packed with C-18 resin (300 Å, 5 μm, Varian, Lexington, MA). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B consisted of 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. An LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode using Xcalibur 4.3.73.11 software and there was a single full-scan mass spectrum in the Orbitrap (300–1500 m/z, 120,000 resolution) followed by 3 s data-dependent MS/MS scans in an Ion Routing Multipole at stepped 27, 30, 33 normalized collision energy (HCD).

Glycopeptide fragmentation data were extracted from the raw file using Byonic™ (Version 2.8.2). The MS data was searched using the Protein Metrics 309 N-glycan library. The search criteria were as follows: Non-specificity; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as the fixed modifications; the oxidation (M) was set as the variable modification; precursor ion mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm for all MS acquired in an orbitrap mass analyzer; and the fragment ion mass tolerances were set at 0.02 Da for all MS2 spectra acquired.

The intensities of each glycan type in identical sites were combined and analyzed for proportion. Data with score less than 30 were discarded. The glycans were classified into oligomannose, hybrid and complex type based on composition. Hybrid and complex type glycan were subdivided according to fucose component and antenna.

### Cryo-electron tomography and electron microscopy

7 μl virus sample was applied onto a glow discharged copper grid coated with holey carbon (R 2/2; Quantifoil, Jena, Germany), and subsequently dipped onto 500 μl HEPES-saline buffer for 1 second to clear the sucrose. A drop of 3 μl gold fiducial beads (10 nm diameter; Aurion, The Netherlands) was applied and the grid was blotted for 4.5 s, vitrified by plunge-freezing into liquid ethane using a Cryo-plunger 3 (Gatan, CA). Fixed cells cultured on grids were applied with 2 μl fiducial beads (10 nm diameter; Aurion, The Netherlands) prior to single-sided plunge-frozen.

The grids were imaged on a Titan Krios microscope (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Hillsboro, OR) operated at a voltage of 300 kV equipped with an energy filter (slit width 20 eV; GIF Quantum LS, Gatan, CA) and K3 direct electron detector (Gatan, CA). Virions were recorded in super-resolution mode at a nominal magnification of 64,000×, resulting in a calibrated pixel size of 0.68 Å. 361 sets of tilt-series data were collected using the dose-symmetric scheme (Hagen et al., 2017) from -60° to 60° at 3° steps and at various defocus between -1.7 and -5 μm in SerialEM (Mastronarde, 2005). At each tilt, a movie consisting of 8 frames was recorded with 0.0265 s/frame exposure, giving a total dose of 131.2 e⁻/Å² per tilt series.

For the freeze-and-thaw test, 1.5 μl purified virions were diluted in 6 μl HEPES-saline buffer at 4 °C, then subjected to five cycles of freezing in liquid nitrogen and thawing in water bath at 37 °C. For the negative staining microscopy, 4 μl freeze-and-thaw sample was applied on copper grids (Zhongjingkeyi Technology, Beijing, China), stained using 2% Uranium acetate and imaged using a Tecnai Spirit TEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Hillsboro, OR).

Data processing

Tilt series data was analysed in a high-throughput pre-processing suite developed in our lab. The electron beam induced motion was corrected using a combination of MotionCor (Li et al., 2013) and MotionCor2 (Zheng et al., 2017) by averaging eight frames for each tilt. Defocuses of the tilt series were measured using Gctf (Zhang, 2016). The tilt series were contrast transfer function corrected using Novactf (Turonova et al., 2017), 319 tilt-series with good fiducial alignment and relative thin ice thickness were reconstructed to tomograms by weighted back projection in IMOD (Kremer et al., 1996), resulting in a final pixel size of 1.36 Å/pixel. The tomograms were 2× and 4× binned for subsequent processing. 2,294 virions, 54,878 prefusion S, 2,010 postfusion S and 18,500 RNPs were manually picked. The viral envelopes were manually selected and modelled as ellipsoids using the mesh methods in Dynamo. On average, 425 equally spaced vectors normal to the viral envelope were established per virus. Initial orientations of all spikes were applied using these vectors. The metadata containing all viral parts was organized with Dynamo catalogue (Castano-Diez et al., 2016) for further analysis.

Subtomogram averaging was done using Dynamo (Castano-Diez et al., 2012). For the prefusion S reconstruction, 54,878 subtomograms were extracted from 4× binned tomograms into boxes of 96×96×96 voxels and EMD-21452 (Walls et al., 2020) was used as the template for their alignment. The resolution was restricted to 40 Å and C3 symmetry was applied at this stage. 8,562 spikes present at the edges of the tomograms were removed to minimize the impact of air-water interface effect and incomplete signal on the structure. The remaining particles were subjected to multi-reference alignment imposing Cl symmetry using EMD-21452 and EMD-21457 lowpassed to 30 Å resolution as the templates, resulting in 25,236 spikes (54.5%) classified into RBD down conformation and 21,080 spikes (45.5%) into one RBD up conformation. Coordinates of the two spike conformations were used to extract boxes of 160×160×160 voxels from the 2× binned tomograms for further alignment. To prevent overfitting, a customized ‘gold-standard adaptive bandpass filter’ method was used for the alignment at this stage, and a criterion of 0.143 for the Fourier shell correlation were used to estimate the resolution. The 2× binned spikes in the RBD down and one RBD up conformations were independently further aligned imposing C3 or Cl symmetry respectively, to 9.5 and 10.9 Å resolution. Finally, the RBD down spike subtomograms were extracted from unbinned tomograms into boxes of 256×256×256 voxels and aligned to 8.7 Å resolution.
The prefusion S maps were lowpassed according to the estimated local resolutions of the reconstructed subunits. Universal empirical B-factors of -1200 and -2000 were applied to sharpen the RBD down and one RBD up spikes, respectively (Wan et al., 2017).

For the postfusion S reconstruction, 2,010 subtomograms were extracted from 4 × binned tomograms into boxes of 96×96×96 voxels, which were averaged to give an initial template for their alignment. The resolution was restricted to 30 Å and C3 symmetry was applied at this stage. Next, the refined coordinates were used to extract 1,954 postfusion S from the 2 × binned tomograms into boxes of 160×160×160 voxels for gold-standard alignment. Subsequent alignment achieved 15.3 Å resolution.

For the RNP reconstruction, 18,500 manually picked RNPs were extracted into subtomograms of 80×80×80 voxels from 4 × binned tomograms and globally aligned using a large sphere (radius 36 pixels) as the template. The resolution was restricted to 40 Å and no symmetry was applied at this stage. Lipid bilayers were visible in the aligned maps, suggesting part of the RNPs are relatively packed with the membrane. The alignment was repeated using a small spherical mask (radius 18 pixels). A reverse “G”-shaped structure appeared after this stage and the refined coordinates were used to extract particles from the 2 × binned tomograms into boxes of 128×128×128 voxels. Gold-standard was applied to align the RNP to a final resolution at 13.1 Å.

To analyze the local pattern of the RNP assembly, the picked RNPs’ coordinates were imported into the Relion subtomogram averaging pipeline (Bharat and Scheres, 2016). The RNP particles were extracted and projected into 2D images. Three characteristic patterns of the 2D classification are selected and subjected to 3D initial model generation and 3D classification: 1) closely packed towards the envelope, 2) hexagonally packed and 3) triangularly packed RNPs. Following 3D refinement, the first class converged only on the membrane. The second class aligned into a hexagonally packed, membrane proximal RNP assembly, and the third class aligned into a tetrahedrally packed, membrane-free assembly. Refined coordinates and orientations of the hexagonal particles (2,270 hexons) and tetrahedral particles (3,659 tetrahedrons) were converted and exported for further alignment in Dynamo. For the RNP hexons, 2,270 particles were extracted into subtomograms of 128×128×128 voxels from 4 × binned tomograms. A shell-shaped mask and C6 symmetry were applied during the alignment. For the RNP tetrahedrons, 3,659 particles were extracted
into subtomograms of 90×90×90 voxels from 4× binned tomograms. A spherical mask and C3 symmetry were applied during the alignment. Both assemblies were only aligned using non-gold standard.

# Assembly structure reconstruction

Three representative SARS-CoV-2 virus (Figures 1B and 4D) and a bundle of postfusion S (Figure 3B) were reconstructed by projecting all spikes and RNPs onto their refined coordinates and merging the structures using Jsubtomo (Huiskonen et al., 2014). For other map-projection to coordinates (Figure 1D, S2C and S5B), the ‘dtplot’ function in Dynamo was used. UCSF Chimera (Pettersen et al., 2004) and ChimeraX (Goddard et al., 2018) were used for rendering the graphics.

# Fitting

Atomic models (PDB accession code 6XR8, 6VYB, 6XRA) of the pre- and postfusion S were rigidly fitted to the corresponding densities using the Fit in Map tool (Pettersen et al., 2004).

The RNP map was segmented into five reverse L-shaped units, which can be further ungrouped into 7 segments above and 10 segments on the base. According to the previous Small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) (Chang et al., 2009) and cryo-EM (Gui et al., 2017) reports, the N_NTD and N_CTD possibly form a reverse L-shaped unit; the N_CTD dimer was suggested to be an assembly unit of the RNP (Chen et al., 2007). One segment above and two on the base forming a reverse “L” from the best solved region were selected, and were fitted with a N_CTD dimer (6WJI) using the ‘fit to segments’ tool (Pintilie et al., 2010) in UCSF Chimera. The segment with the best fitting score (0.78 against 0.74 and 0.72) were adopted as the N_CTD. The other two segments were fitted with the N_NTD monomer (6WKP, score 0.92 and 0.90). With the reverse “L”-shaped N_NTD-CTD pair formed, we fitted the rest of RNP with four such units, leaving two upper segments unoccupied. Together, the map was interpreted as a decamer of N.

Molecular dynamic flexible fitting (MDFF) (Trabuco et al., 2009) was applied to improve the fitting of the atomic model to the S in RBD down conformation. PDB:6XR8 was prepared in VMD (Humphrey et al., 1996) for the MDFF, which was performed in vacuum until convergence using NAMD 2.12 (Phillips et al., 2005) and the CHARMM36 force field

(MacKerell et al., 1998). A scaling factor $\zeta = 0.3$ kcal/mol; the secondary structure, domain and symmetry restraints were applied for the simulation.

QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS

Morphological description of virions (Figure 1C and S1)

1,959 ellipsoidal models for the envelopes were used for virus diameter estimation statistics; For the statistics in Fig S1, membranes of virion were fitted by ellipse, and 113 virions without high-speed centrifugation and 157 virions with high-speed centrifugation were used.

Distribution of spikes in different conformation (Figure 1C and 3C)

1,743 virions were used for calculating the proportion of RBD down/one RBD up conformations per virus; the tilt angle statistics was performed on 39,112 4× binned spikes (CC > 0.1); and 742 virions were used for RNP statistics. 422 virions were used for the postfusion S statistics. 139 virions which had both prefusion and postfusion S were used for the statistics of conformation proportion. 91 virions which have more than 3 postfusion S and prefusion S were used for spike average distance statistics. And Paired T-test showed average distance among postfusion S and prefusion S is significantly different (p-value < 0.01). Statistics was performed using Python package Scipy.

Distribution of spikes' tilt angles (Figure 1D)

The aligned location and orientation were used for the statistics of the spike tilt angles. For a given spike on a given virus, the nearest envelope mesh to the spike stem end was found. The angle between vector A (the spike's Z axis) and vector B (normal to the envelope mesh) was calculated. For the statistics in Fig S1C, envelopes of 113 virions before ultracentrifugation and 157 after ultracentrifugation were fitted by ellipse to estimate their diameters.

382 virions with more than 5 tetrahedron/hexon RNP assemblies were included for the statistics shown in Figure 4E. They were sorted into three classes according to the ratio of the longest to the shortest axis: spherical (long/short axis: 1-1.24, 127 virions), intermediate (long/short axis: 1.24-1.43, 127 virions), and ellipsoidal (long/short axis: 1.43-2.45, 128 virions). For each class, the ratio of tetrahedrons to hexons was calculated. Wilcoxon test was applied and showed that the frequency of hexons and tetrahedrons is significantly different between these three classes (p < 0.01).

Journal Pre-proof

Supplementary Video 1: Related to Figure 1. Cryo-electron tomography and reconstruction of the SARS-CoV-2 virus

REFERENCES

Barcena, M., Oostergetel, G.T., Bartelink, W., Faas, F.G., Verkleij, A., Rottier, P.J., Koster, A.J., and Bosch, B.J. (2009). Cryo-electron tomography of mouse hepatitis virus: Insights into the structure of the coronavirion. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 582-587.

Turonova, B., Sikora, M., Schurmann, C., Hagen, W.J.H., Welsch, S., Blanc, F.E.C., von Bulow, S., Gecht, M., Bagola, K., Horner, C., *et al.* (2020). In situ structural analysis of SARS-CoV-2 spike reveals flexibility mediated by three hinges. Science. DOI: 10.1126/science.abd5223

Belouzard, S., Chu, V.C., and Whittaker, G.R. (2009). Activation of the SARS coronavirus spike protein via sequential proteolytic cleavage at two distinct sites. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 5871-5876.

Bharat, T.A.M., and Scheres, S.H.W. (2016). Resolving macromolecular structures from electron cryo-tomography data using subtomogram averaging in RELION. Nat. Protoc. 11, 9-20.

Cai, Y., Zhang, J., Xiao, T., Peng, H., Sterling, S.M., Walsh, R.M., Jr., Rawson, S., Rits-Volloch, S., and Chen, B. (2020). Distinct conformational states of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. Science, eabd4251.

Cao, L., Pauthner, M., Andrabi, R., Rantalainen, K., Berndsen, Z., Diedrich, J.K., Menis, S., Sok, D., Bastidas, R., Park, S.R., *et al.* (2018). Differential processing of HIV envelope glycans on the virus and soluble recombinant trimer. Nat. Commun. 9, 3693.

Castano-Diez, D., Kudryashev, M., Arheit, M., and Stahlberg, H. (2012). Dynamo: a flexible, user-friendly development tool for subtomogram averaging of cryo-EM data in high-performance computing environments. J. Struct. Biol. 178, 139-151.

Castano-Diez, D., Kudryashev, M., and Stahlberg, H. (2016). Dynamo Catalogue: Geometrical tools and data management for particle picking in subtomogram averaging of cryo-electron tomograms. J. Struct. Biol. 197, 135-144.

Caul, E.O., and Eggleston, S.I. (1979). Coronavirus-like particles present in simian faeces. Vet. Rec. 104, 168-169.

Chang, C.K., Hsu, Y.L., Chang, Y.H., Chao, F.A., Wu, M.C., Huang, Y.S., Hu, C.K., and Huang, T.H. (2009). Multiple nucleic acid binding sites and intrinsic disorder of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus nucleocapsid protein: implications for ribonucleocapsid protein packaging. J. Virol. 83, 2255-2264.

Chen, C.Y., Chang, C.K., Chang, Y.W., Sue, S.C., Bai, H.I., Riang, L., Hsiao, C.D., and Huang, T.H. (2007). Structure of the SARS coronavirus nucleocapsid protein RNA-binding dimerization domain suggests a mechanism for helical packaging of viral RNA. J. Mol. Biol. 368, 1075-1086.

Chi, X., Yan, R., Zhang, J., Zhang, G., Zhang, Y., Hao, M., Zhang, Z., Fan, P., Dong, Y., Yang, Y., *et al.* (2020). A neutralizing human antibody binds to the N-terminal domain of the Spike protein of SARS-CoV-2. Science 369, 650-655.

Liu, C., Yang, Y., Gao, Y., Shen, C., Ju, B., Liu, C., Tang, X., Wei, J., Ma, X., Liu, W., *et al.* (2020). Viral Architecture of SARS-CoV-2 with Post-Fusion Spike Revealed by Cryo-EM. bioRxiv, https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.1103.1102.972927.

Fan, X., Cao, D., Kong, L., and Zhang, X. (2020). Cryo-EM analysis of the post-fusion structure of the SARS-CoV spike glycoprotein. Nat. Commun. 11, 3618.

Gao, Q., Bao, L., Mao, H., Wang, L., Xu, K., Yang, M., Li, Y., Zhu, L., Wang, N., Lv, Z., *et al.* (2020). Development of an inactivated vaccine candidate for SARS-CoV-2. Science 369, 77-81.

Goddard, T.D., Huang, C.C., Meng, E.C., Pettersen, E.F., Couch, G.S., Morris, J.H., and Ferrin, T.E. (2018). UCSF ChimeraX: Meeting modern challenges in visualization and analysis. Protein Sci. 27, 14-25.

Gui, M., Liu, X., Guo, D.Y., Zhang, Z., Yin, C.C., Chen, Y., and Xiang, Y. (2017). Electron microscopy studies of the coronavirus ribonucleoprotein complex. Protein Cell 8, 219-224.

Hagen, W.J.H., Wan, W., and Briggs, J.A.G. (2017). Implementation of a cryo-electron tomography tilt-scheme optimized for high resolution subtomogram averaging. J. Struct. Biol. 197, 191-198.

Yao, H., Lu, X., Chen, Q., Xu, K., Chen, Y., Cheng, L., Liu, F., Wu, Z., Wu, H., Jin, C., *et al.* (2020). Patient-derived mutations impact pathogenicity of SARS-CoV-2. medRxiv, https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.1104.1114.20060160.

Harris, A., Cardone, G., Winkler, D.C., Heymann, J.B., Brecher, M., White, J.M., and Steven, A.C. (2006). Influenza virus pleiomorphy characterized by cryoelectron tomography. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 103, 19123-19127.

Henderson, R., Edwards, R.J., Mansouri, K., Janowska, K., Stalls, V., Gobeil, S.M.C., Kopp, M., Li, D., Parks, R., Hsu, A.L., *et al.* (2020). Controlling the SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein conformation. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41594-020-0479-4

Hoffmann, M., Kleine-Weber, H., Schroeder, S., Kruger, N., Herrler, T., Erichsen, S., Schiergens, T.S., Herrler, G., Wu, N.H., Nitsche, A., *et al.* (2020). SARS-CoV-2 Cell Entry Depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and Is Blocked by a Clinically Proven Protease Inhibitor. Cell 181, 271-280 e278.

Huiskonen, J.T., Parsy, M.L., Li, S., Bitto, D., Renner, M., and Bowden, T.A. (2014). Averaging of Viral Envelope Glycoprotein Spikes from Electron Cryotomography Reconstructions using Jsubtomo. Jove-J. Vis. Exp., e51714.

Humphrey, W., Dalke, A., and Schulten, K. (1996). VMD: visual molecular dynamics. J. Mol. Graph. 14, 33-38, 27-38.

Jin, J., Galaz-Montoya, J.G., Sherman, M.B., Sun, S.Y., Goldsmith, C.S., O'Toole, E.T., Ackerman, L., Carlson, L.A., Weaver, S.C., Chiu, W., *et al.* (2018). Neutralizing Antibodies Inhibit Chikungunya Virus Budding at the Plasma Membrane. Cell Host Microbe 24, 417.

Kim, D., Lee, J.Y., Yang, J.S., Kim, J.W., Kim, V.N., and Chang, H. (2020). The Architecture of SARS-CoV-2 Transcriptome. Cell 181, 914-921 e910.

Kirchdoerfer, R.N., Wang, N., Pallesen, J., Wrapp, D., Turner, H.L., Cottrell, C.A., Corbett, K.S., Graham, B.S., McLellan, J.S., and Ward, A.B. (2018). Stabilized coronavirus spikes are resistant to conformational changes induced by receptor recognition or proteolysis. Sci. Rep. 8, 15701.

Kremer, J.R., Mastronarde, D.N., and McIntosh, J.R. (1996). Computer visualization of three-dimensional image data using IMOD. J. Struct. Biol. 116, 71-76.

Lan, J., Ge, J., Yu, J., Shan, S., Zhou, H., Fan, S., Zhang, Q., Shi, X., Wang, Q., Zhang, L., *et al.* (2020). Structure of the SARS-CoV-2 spike receptor-binding domain bound to the ACE2 receptor. Nature 581, 215-220.

Li, S., Sun, Z., Pryce, R., Parsy, M.L., Fehling, S.K., Schlie, K., Siebert, C.A., Garten, W., Bowden, T.A., Strecker, T., *et al.* (2016). Acidic pH-Induced Conformations and LAMP1 Binding of the Lassa Virus Glycoprotein Spike. PLoS Pathog. 12, e1005418.

Li, X., Mooney, P., Zheng, S., Booth, C.R., Braunfeld, M.B., Gubbens, S., Agard, D.A., and Cheng, Y. (2013). Electron counting and beam-induced motion correction enable near-atomic-resolution single-particle cryo-EM. Nat. Methods 10, 584-590.

Liu, J., Bartesaghi, A., Borgnia, M.J., Sapiro, G., and Subramaniam, S. (2008). Molecular architecture of native HIV-1 gp120 trimers. Nature 455, 109-113.

Casalino, L., Gaieb, Z., Dommer, A.C., Harbison, A.M., Fogarty, C.A., Barros, E.P., Taylor, B.C., Fadda, E., and Amaro, R.E. (2020). Shielding and Beyond: The Roles of Glycans in SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein. bioRxiv, https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.1106.1111.146522.

Lu, R., Zhao, X., Li, J., Niu, P., Yang, B., Wu, H., Wang, W., Song, H., Huang, B., Zhu, N., *et al.* (2020). Genomic characterisation and epidemiology of 2019 novel coronavirus: implications for virus origins and receptor binding. Lancet 395, 565-574.

MacKerell, A.D., Bashford, D., Bellott, M., Dunbrack, R.L., Evanseck, J.D., Field, M.J., Fischer, S., Gao, J., Guo, H., Ha, S., *et al.* (1998). All-atom empirical potential for molecular modeling and dynamics studies of proteins. J. Phys. Chem. B 102, 3586-3616.

Mastronarde, D.N. (2005). Automated electron microscope tomography using robust prediction of specimen movements. J. Struct. Biol. 152, 36-51.

Neuman, B.W., Adair, B.D., Yeager, M., and Buchmeier, M.J. (2008). Purification and electron cryomicroscopy of coronavirus particles. Methods Mol. Biol. 454, 129-136.

Neuman, B.W., Adair, B.D., Yoshioka, C., Quispe, J.D., Orca, G., Kuhn, P., Milligan, R.A., Yeager, M., and Buchmeier, M.J. (2006). Supramolecular architecture of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus revealed by electron cryomicroscopy. J. Virol. 80, 7918-7928.

Neuman, B.W., Kiss, G., Kunding, A.H., Bhella, D., Baksh, M.F., Connelly, S., Droese, B., Klaus, J.P., Makino, S., Sawicki, S.G., *et al.* (2011). A structural analysis of M protein in coronavirus assembly and morphology. J. Struct. Biol. 174, 11-22.

Pallesen, J., Wang, N., Corbett, K.S., Wrapp, D., Kirchdoerfer, R.N., Turner, H.L., Cottrell, C.A., Becker, M.M., Wang, L., Shi, W., *et al.* (2017). Immunogenicity and structures of a rationally designed prefusion MERS-CoV spike antigen. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 114, E7348-E7357.

Pettersen, E.F., Goddard, T.D., Huang, C.C., Couch, G.S., Greenblatt, D.M., Meng, E.C., and Ferrin, T.E. (2004). UCSF chimera - A visualization system for exploratory research and analysis. J. Comput. Chem. 25, 1605-1612.

Phillips, J.C., Braun, R., Wang, W., Gumbart, J., Tajkhorshid, E., Villa, E., Chipot, C., Skeel, R.D., Kale, L., and Schulten, K. (2005). Scalable molecular dynamics with NAMD. J Comput Chem 26, 1781-1802.

Pintilie, G.D., Zhang, J., Goddard, T.D., Chiu, W., and Gossard, D.C. (2010). Quantitative analysis of cryo-EM density map segmentation by watershed and scale-space filtering, and fitting of structures by alignment to regions. J. Struct. Biol. 170, 427-438.

Pinto, D., Park, Y.J., Beltramello, M., Walls, A.C., Tortorici, M.A., Bianchi, S., Jaconi, S., Culap, K., Zatta, F., De Marco, A., *et al.* (2020). Structural and functional analysis of a potent sarbecovirus neutralizing antibody. bioRxiv, https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.1104.1107.023903.

Rey, F.A., and Lok, S.M. (2018). Common Features of Enveloped Viruses and Implications for Immunogen Design for Next-Generation Vaccines. Cell 172, 1319-1334.

Ritchie, G., Harvey, D.J., Feldmann, F., Stroehner, U., Feldmann, H., Royle, L., Dwek, R.A., and Rudd, P.M. (2010). Identification of N-linked carbohydrates from severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) spike glycoprotein. Virology 399, 257-269.

Shang, J., Ye, G., Shi, K., Wan, Y., Luo, C., Aihara, H., Geng, Q., Auerbach, A., and Li, F. (2020). Structural basis of receptor recognition by SARS-CoV-2. Nature 581, 221-224.

Simmons, G., Reeves, J.D., Rennekamp, A.J., Amberg, S.M., Piefer, A.J., and Bates, P. (2004). Characterization of severe acute respiratory syndrome-associated coronavirus (SARS-CoV) spike glycoprotein-mediated viral entry. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 101, 4240-4245.

Simmons, G., Zmora, P., Gierer, S., Heurich, A., and Pohlmann, S. (2013). Proteolytic activation of the SARS-coronavirus spike protein: cutting enzymes at the cutting edge of antiviral research. Antiviral Res. 100, 605-614.

Song, W., Gui, M., Wang, X., and Xiang, Y. (2018). Cryo-EM structure of the SARS coronavirus spike glycoprotein in complex with its host cell receptor ACE2. PLoS Pathog. 14, e1007236.

Steffen, K., Mirko Cortese, Sophie L. Winter, Moritz Wachsmuth-Melm, Christopher J. Neufeldt, Berati Cerikan, Megan L. Stanifer, Steeve Boulant, Ralf Bartenschlager, and Chlanda, P. (2020). SARS-CoV-2 structure and replication characterized by in situ cryo-electron tomography. bioRxiv, https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.1106.1123.167064.

Struwe, W.B., Chertova, E., Allen, J.D., Seabright, G.E., Watanabe, Y., Harvey, D.J., Medina-Ramirez, M., Roser, J.D., Smith, R., Westcott, D., *et al.* (2018). Site-Specific Glycosylation of Virion-Derived HIV-1 Env Is Mimicked by a Soluble Trimeric Immunogen. Cell Rep. 24, 1958-1966 e1955.

Trabuco, L.G., Villa, E., Schreiner, E., Harrison, C.B., and Schulten, K. (2009). Molecular dynamics flexible fitting: a practical guide to combine cryo-electron microscopy and X-ray crystallography. Methods 49, 174-180.

Turonova, B., Schur, F.K.M., Wan, W., and Briggs, J.A.G. (2017). Efficient 3D-CTF correction for cryo-electron tomography using NovaCTF improves subtomogram averaging resolution to 3.4A. J. Struct. Biol. 199, 187-195.

Walls, A.C., Park, Y.J., Tortorici, M.A., Wall, A., McGuire, A.T., and Veesler, D. (2020). Structure, Function, and Antigenicity of the SARS-CoV-2 Spike Glycoprotein. Cell 181, 281-292.

Walls, A.C., Xiong, X., Park, Y.J., Tortorici, M.A., Snijder, J., Quispe, J., Cameroni, E., Gopal, R., Dai, M., Lanzavecchia, A., *et al.* (2019). Unexpected Receptor Functional Mimicry Elucidates Activation of Coronavirus Fusion. Cell 176, 1026-1039 e1015.

Wan, W., Kolesnikova, L., Clarke, M., Koehler, A., Noda, T., Becker, S., and Briggs, J.A.G. (2017). Structure and assembly of the Ebola virus nucleocapsid. Nature 551, 394-397.

Wang, Q., Zhang, Y., Wu, L., Niu, S., Song, C., Zhang, Z., Lu, G., Qiao, C., Hu, Y., Yuen, K.Y., *et al.* (2020). Structural and Functional Basis of SARS-CoV-2 Entry by Using Human ACE2. Cell 181, 894-904 e899.

Watanabe, Y., Allen, J.D., Wrapp, D., McLellan, J.S., and Crispin, M. (2020a). Site-specific glycan analysis of the SARS-CoV-2 spike. Science, eabb9983.

Watanabe, Y., Berndsen, Z.T., Raghwani, J., Seabright, G.E., Allen, J.D., Pybus, O.G., McLellan, J.S., Wilson, I.A., Bowden, T.A., Ward, A.B., *et al.* (2020b). Vulnerabilities in coronavirus glycan shields despite extensive glycosylation. Nat. Commun. 11, 2688.

Watanabe, Y., Raghwani, J., Allen, J.D., Seabright, G.E., Li, S., Moser, F., Huiskonen, J.T., Strecker, T., Bowden, T.A., and Crispin, M. (2018). Structure of the Lassa virus glycan shield provides a model for immunological resistance. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 115, 7320-7325.

Wrapp, D., Wang, N., Corbett, K.S., Goldsmith, J.A., Hsieh, C.L., Abiona, O., Graham, B.S., and McLellan, J.S. (2020). Cryo-EM structure of the 2019-nCoV spike in the prefusion conformation. Science 367, 1260-1263.

Wu, F., Zhao, S., Yu, B., Chen, Y.M., Wang, W., Song, Z.G., Hu, Y., Tao, Z.W., Tian, J.H., Pei, Y.Y., *et al.* (2020). A new coronavirus associated with human respiratory disease in China. Nature 579, 265-269.

Xia, S., Liu, M.Q., Wang, C., Xu, W., Lan, Q.S., Feng, S.L., Qi, F.F., Bao, L.L., Du, L.Y., Liu, S.W., *et al.* (2020). Inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 (previously 2019-nCoV) infection by a highly potent pan-coronavirus fusion inhibitor targeting its spike protein that harbors a high capacity to mediate membrane fusion. Cell Res. 30, 343-355.

Xiong, X., Qu, K., Ciazynska, K.A., Hosmillo, M., Carter, A.P., Ebrahimi, S., Ke, Z., Scheres, S.H.W., Bergamaschi, L., Grice, G.L., *et al.* (2020). A thermostable, closed SARS-CoV-2 spike protein trimer. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41594-020-0478-5

Yan, R., Zhang, Y., Li, Y., Xia, L., Guo, Y., and Zhou, Q. (2020). Structural basis for the recognition of SARS-CoV-2 by full-length human ACE2. Science 367, 1444-1448.

Zhang, K. (2016). Gctf: Real-time CTF determination and correction. J. Struct. Biol. 193, 1-12.

Zheng, S.Q., Palovcak, E., Armache, J.P., Verba, K.A., Cheng, Y., and Agard, D.A. (2017). MotionCor2: anisotropic correction of beam-induced motion for improved cryo-electron microscopy. Nat. Methods 14, 331-332.

Zhou, P., Yang, X.L., Wang, X.G., Hu, B., Zhang, L., Zhang, W., Si, H.R., Zhu, Y., Li, B., Huang, C.L., *et al.* (2020). A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat origin. Nature 579, 270-273.

Ke, Z., Oton, J., Qu, K., Cortese, M., Zila, V., McKeane, L., Nakane, T., Zivanov, J., Neufeldt, C.J., Cerikan, B., *et al.* (2020). Structures and distributions of SARS-CoV-2 spike proteins on intact virions. Nature. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2665-2

Highlights

- Molecular architecture of the authentic SARS-CoV-2 virus is unveiled
- Native structures of S in RBD down, one RBD up and postfusion conformations are solved
- Compositions of the glycans from the native S are characterized
- Structure and assembly of the RNPs are revealed *in situ*

In Brief - Combined imaging analyses of 2,294 intact virions from authentic SARS-CoV-2 virus resolves the S protein in both pre and post fusion conformations and characterizes the molecular architecture of SARS-CoV-2 at high resolution

Journal Pre-proof

A

B

RBD down One RBD up

RNP Envelope

20 nm

C

Particle count per virion

Prefusion S

RNP

Virion count

Proportion of RBD down spikes

Diameter (nm)

Short Medium Long axis

Spike count

Tilt angle

Local resolution (Å)

Journal Pre-proof

A

RBD down S
One RBD up S

B

N331
N61
N1134
N709
N1158
N282
N801
N1098
N657
N1173/1194

C

Marker
ZJU_5
ZJU_5+PNGase F
PNGase F

kDa
190
S
115
S1
80
S2
70
S1
N
50
S2
N
PNase F
30
25
15

D

N17
N61
N234
N122
N331
N603
N717
N801
N1074
N1158
N74
N282
N1194
N165
N343
N709
N616
N1098
N1134
N149
N1173

S1
S2
Oligomannose
Hybrid
Complex
Core

Journal Pre-proof

A

B

C

D

100 nm

Membrane

90°

10 nm

6 nm N-linked glycans

N1098
N1074
N1134
N1158
N1173
N1194

22.5 nm

Membrane

Frequency

Average spike distance (nm)

Proportion of postfusion spikes

Spikes per virion

Journal Pre-proof

A

|  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |

2D classes

B

C

D

E

Class 1: RNP hexon  
the "Eggs-in-a-nest"

Class 2: RNP tetrahedron  
the "Pyramid"
