
JOURNAL OF BACTERIOLOGY, Sept. 1993, p. 5934–5944

0021-9193/93/185934-11$02.00/0

Copyright © 1993, American Society for Microbiology

The pilG Gene Product, Required for *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* Pilus Production and Twitching Motility, Is Homologous to the Enteric, Single-Domain Response Regulator CheY

A. DARZINS

Department of Microbiology, The Ohio State University, 484 West 12th Avenue, Columbus, Ohio 43210

Received 5 March 1993/Accepted 21 June 1993

The *Pseudomonas aeruginosa pilG* gene, encoding a protein which is involved in pilus production, was cloned by phenotypic complementation of a unique, pilus-defective mutant of strain PAO1. This mutant, designated FA2, although resistant to the pilus-specific phage D3112 was sensitive to the pilus-specific phages B3 and F116L. In spite of the unusual phage sensitivity pattern, FA2 lacked the ability to produce functional polar pili (*pil*) and was incapable of twitching motility (*twt*). Genetic analysis revealed that the FA2 *pil* mutation, designated *pilG1*, mapped near the *met-28* marker located at 20 min and was distinct from the previously described *pilT* mutation. This map location was confirmed by localization of a 6.2-kb EcoRI fragment that complemented FA2 on the SpeI and DpnI physical map of the *P*. *aeruginosa* PAO1 chromosome. A 700-bp region encompassing the *pilG* gene was sequenced, and a 405-bp open reading frame, with characteristic *P*. *aeruginosa* codon bias, was identified. The molecular weight of the protein predicted from the amino acid sequence of PilG, which was determined to be 14,717, corresponded very closely to that of a polypeptide with the apparent molecular weight of 15,000 detected after expression of *pilG* from the T7 promoter in *Escherichia coli*. Moreover, the predicted amino acid sequence of PilG showed significant homology to that of the enteric CheY protein, a single-domain response regulator. A chromosomal *pilG* insertion mutant, constructed by allele replacement of the wild-type gene, was not capable of pilus production or twitching motility but displayed normal flagellum-mediated motility. These results, therefore, suggest that PilG may be an important part of the signal transduction system involved in the elaboration of *P*. *aeruginosa* pili.

---

*Pseudomonas aeruginosa* pathogenesis is multifactorial and involves a number of cell-associated and extracellular virulence factors (31). Both in vivo and in vitro studies have implicated the type IV (NMePhe) pili of *P*. *aeruginosa* as important cell-associated virulence determinants that play a crucial role in bacterial adherence and colonization of mucosal epithelium (18, 34, 54, 56, 57, 65, 83). The pili of *P*. *aeruginosa* also serve as receptors for various bacteriophages, such as the transposable Mu-like phages D3112 and B3 (13, 14, 37, 58, 60), the temperate transducing phage F116 (55), and the virulent phage PO4 (7). Furthermore, the polar pili of *P*. *aeruginosa* are also responsible for a novel mode of flagellum-independent surface translocation known as twitching motility (10, 26). The exact role of pili in this unique form of surface translocation, however, has not been elucidated.

Genetic analysis of *P*. *aeruginosa* pilus production and twitching motility has revealed the requirement for several *pil* loci which have been localized to different regions of the chromosome. The pili of *P*. *aeruginosa* are composed of protein subunits encoded by the *pilA* structural gene (64), the expression of which requires both the alternative sigma factor RpoN (32) and the transcriptional activator PilR (33). Three additional nearby genes are also required for pilus production. These genes, designated *pilB*, *pilC*, and *pilD*, are transcribed in the direction opposite that of *pilA* (49). While the functions of the proteins encoded by the *pilB* and *pilC* genes have not yet been fully established, the *pilD* gene encodes a protein with pilin-specific leader peptidase activity which is required for the successful translocation of pilin subunits across the inner membrane (50). The PilD protein has also been shown to process components of the machinery necessary for the secretion of several *P*. *aeruginosa* extracellular products (51, 75). Recent mapping studies have shown that the *pilA*, -B, -C, -D, -R, and *rpoN* genes reside relatively close to one another, between 71.3 and 75 min, on the PAO1 chromosome (21).

The *P*. *aeruginosa pilT* gene, which is essential for twitching motility, has been localized near the *proC* gene at 20 min on the PAO chromosome (82). *pilT* mutants are characterized by the presence of multiple, nonretractile pili (*pil*NR) and, as a result, are incapable of translocating across solid surfaces. The *pilT* gene product, which is presumably required for pilus retraction, encodes a protein that exhibits a significant degree of homology to PilB and to certain proteins in other bacterial systems involved in DNA transport and protein secretion (82).

Furthermore, since pilus production and twitching motility are likely to be complex processes, it is not surprising that a preliminary analysis of several independent pilus-specific phage-resistant mutants from this laboratory has revealed the presence of additional *pil* loci. In addition to the genes located within the 71- to 75-min and 20-min regions described previously (21, 82), at least three additional *pil* loci have been localized to approximately 7, 27, and 41 min (16, 20).

This report describes the identification, mapping, and characterization of a new gene, designated *pilG*, which is involved in *P*. *aeruginosa* pilus production. I present evidence that PilG has significant homology to a subfamily of bacterial response regulator proteins, which includes such members as CheY and Spo0F, that retain only the conserved response regulator N-terminal domain (73). Since these proteins are believed to directly control the adaptive re-

TABLE 1. Strains, phages, and plasmids used in this study

| Strain, phage, or plasmid | Relevant characteristics$^a$ | Source or reference |
|---------------------------|------------------------------|---------------------|
| **E. coli**              |                              |                     |
| DH5α                     | $recA endA1 gyrA96 thi-1 hsdR17 sup44 relA1 lacZΔM15$ | N. Pagratis |
| S17-1                    | RP4 2-Tc::Mu-Km::Tn7 pro r⁻ m⁺ (Tp⁺ Sm⁺) | 70 |
| BL21(DE3)                 | F⁻ ompT rB⁻ mB⁻, lambda D69 lysogen carrying phage T7 gene 1 under control of $P_{lacUV5}$ | 76 |
| CBK940                   | Nal⁺ derivative of DH10B | C. Berg |
| D1210                    | HB101 lacIq lacY⁺ | 62 |
| D1210HP                  | D1210, lambda xis kil cI857 | 25; C. Berg |
| DH10B                    | F⁻ mcrA Δ(mrr-hsdRMS-mcrBC) φ80dlacZΔM15 ΔlacX74 endA1 recA1 deoR Δ(ara leu)7697 araD139 galU galK nupG rpsL | Bio-Rad |
| **P. aeruginosa**        |                              |                     |
| CD10                     | PAO4141::D3112 cts | 13 |
| FA1                      | D3112⁺ F116⁺ B3⁺ | This study |
| FA2                      | pilG1 D3112⁺ F116ˢ B3ˢ | This study |
| FA3                      | PAO4141 pilG::myδ-1 Km⁺ D3112⁺ F116⁺ B3⁺ | This study |
| HOD1                     | PAO1 pilT mutant, D3112⁺ F116⁺ B3⁺ | 16, 79 |
| PA103                    | Fla⁻ | D. Galloway |
| PAO1                     | Prototroph, FP⁻ | 27 |
| PAO222                   | ilv-226 his-4 lys-12 proA82 met-28 trp-6 FP⁻ | 24 |
| PAO381                   | leu-10 strA FP2⁺ | R. V. Miller |
| PAO4141                  | pro-9024 met-9020 blaP9202 blaJ9111 aph-9001 FP⁻ | H. Matsumoto |
| **Phages**               |                              |                     |
| D3112 cts                | cts (temperature-sensitive repressor) | 58 |
| B3 cts                   | cts (temperature-sensitive repressor) | A. Darzins |
| F116L cts53              | cts (temperature-sensitive repressor) | 36; R. V. Miller |
| G101                     | Generalized transducing phage | 28 |
| **Plasmids**             |                              |                     |
| pADD948                  | Mini-D948 in vivo cloning replicon, Ap⁺ Cm⁺ | 14 |
| pADD1619                 | pRO1614 with 6.0-kb BamHI fragment ($pilT^{+}$) | A. Darzins |
| pCP13                    | IncP Tc⁺ Km⁺ (23 kb) cos | 15 |
| pIF200                   | pOX38::miniγδ-1 Km⁺ | 2 |
| pIF402                   | pACYC184-γδtnpA Cm⁺ | C. Berg |
| pMOB                     | Miniplasmid vector, 1.8 kb, Ap⁺ | 74; Gold Biotech |
| pMOB3                    | pHSS21 sacB sacR oriT Km⁺ Cm⁺ | 69 |
| pNOT19                   | pUC19 with 10-bp NdeI-NotI adaptor in NdeI site, Ap⁺ | 69 |
| pRK2013                  | rep$_{pMB1}$ Tra⁺ (RK2) Km⁺ | 22 |
| pRO1614                  | Broad-host-range vector, 6.2 kb, Ap⁺ (Cb⁺) Tc⁺ | 53 |
| pT7-2                    | T7 φ10 promoter, 2.777 kb, Ap⁺ | United States Biochemical Corp. |
| FP2                      | Hg⁺ Tra⁺ Cma⁺ | 29 |

$^a$ Ap⁺, ampicillin resistance; Cb⁺, carbenicillin resistance; Cm⁺, chloramphenicol resistance; Cma⁺, chromosome mobilization ability; Hg⁺, mercury resistance; Km⁺, kanamycin resistance; Nal⁺, naladixic acid resistance; Tc⁺, tetracycline resistance; Tp⁺, trimethoprim resistance; Tra⁺, self-transmissible; oriT, RK2 origin of transfer; rep$_{pMB1}$, replicon from pMB1; Sm⁺, streptomycin resistance. *P. aeruginosa* gene designations are as described by Royle et al. (61).

Genetic procedures. Uninterrupted liquid matings with FP2 were carried out as previously described (17). Recombinants were tested for phage sensitivity by repatching individual colonies onto the same minimal selective medium and placing 10 μl of a D3112 phage suspension (5 × 10⁹ PFU/ml) on each patch. Any evidence of cell killing as detected by zones of lysis were scored as sensitive. *E. coli* cells were transformed by the method of Mandel and Higa (40) as modified by Morrison (47). Recombinant plasmids in *E. coli* were introduced into *P. aeruginosa* by using triparental matings with pRK2013 (22) as the mobilizing plasmid or with strain S17-1 as the mobilizer (70). Transductions with G101 (43) and D3112 (14) were performed as described previously. Gene replacement procedures were carried out as recently described by Schweizer (69).

Isolation of phage-resistant, pilus-defective (*pil*) mutants. Lysates of D3112 cts were prepared as previously described (13, 46). An overnight culture of PAO1 cells was diluted, and 3 × 10⁷ cells were mixed with 3 × 10¹⁰ D3112 cts phage. Following addition of soft agar, the mixture was poured onto LB agar plates and incubated for 24 h at 42°C. Surviving colonies were streaked onto individual LB agar plates. Phage sensitivity was assayed by two methods. For screening purposes, strains were streaked onto LB agar media and spotted with 10 μl of a phage lysate (10⁹ to 10¹⁰ PFU/ml). Zones of clearing were indicative of phage sensitivity. Phage sensitivity was also measured by the plaque assay. Ten-microliter spots of diluted phage lysates were spotted onto LB top agar seeded with 0.2 ml of a culture of indicator bacteria grown to stationary phase in LB broth.

Motility assays. Twitching motility was assayed by two methods. LB agar (1%) plates poured to an average depth of 3 mm were dried briefly, and the strains to be tested were stab inoculated with a needle to the bottom of the polystyrene dish. Plates were incubated at 37°C for 24 h, after which time the zone between the agar and polystyrene was measured (45). The second procedure used to visualize twitching motility was the slide culture method. Strains were point inoculated onto the surface of a LB agar (1%) slice placed on a microscope slide. The inoculum was covered with a coverslip, and the slide cultures were incubated at 37°C for 1 to 12 h in a humid environment to prevent drying of the medium. Twitching motility was visualized under a Zeiss phase microscope, using the 40× objective. Strain PAO1 (Pil⁺ Twt⁺) or PAO4141 (Pil⁺ Twt⁺) was included as a positive control in both assays.

Flagellum-mediated motility was assayed by inoculating the strains to be tested into the center of a LB agar (0.3%) plate. After 8 to 12 h of incubation at 37°C, the plates were inspected for radial zones of bacterial growth indicating a motile response. Strain PAO1 (Fla⁺) or PAO4141 (Fla⁺) was included as a positive control. Strain PA103 (Fla⁻) was included as a negative control.

DNA sequence analysis. The 705-bp EcoRI-BamHI fragment from pADD2670 was subcloned into the miniplasmid pMOB. *myδ-1* (Km') insertions were introduced into the cloned fragment and mapped by the procedure described previously (2). Individual insertions that were spaced roughly 100 to 200 bp apart were chosen for sequence analysis (see Fig. 4B). Double-stranded DNA sequencing was accomplished with the dideoxy chain termination method (63) with the Sequenase 2.0 sequencing kit (United States Biochemical). The oligonucleotide primers used to determine the sequences adjacent to the *myδ-1* insertions (*res* and *kan* primers) have been described previously (2). 7-Deaza-dGTP was used in the place of dGTP to reduce the number of sequencing artifacts. ³⁵S-dCTP-labeled samples were run in 8 M urea–6% polyacrylamide gels. Sequence analysis was performed with the IBI MacVector software program. Nucleotide and derived amino acid sequences were also analyzed with the Wisconsin Genetics Computer Group software (version 7.1). The TFASTA algorithm for protein homology was used to compare the sequence of the deduced protein product of *pilG* with sequences in the GenBank data base (release 73.0). PUBLISH and GAP were used to generate the *pilG* sequence (see Fig. 5) and for comparison between PilG and CheY (see Fig. 6), respectively.

Expression studies with the T7 RNA polymerase-promoter system. The T7 expression system was used as described by Tabor and Richardson (77). A 705-bp HindIII-BamHI fragment containing the *pilG* gene was cloned into the identical sites of the T7 promoter-containing vector pT7-2. The resulting plasmid was transformed into BL21(DE3), and expression of the cloned fragment was analyzed by labeling the induced gene products with ³H-labeled amino acids (Amershams; 1 mCi/ml) as described by Groisman et al. (23). The labeled polypeptides were separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) (12.5% acrylamide [wt/vol]) (19) and visualized by fluorography (12).

Electron microscopy. Bacterial strains were examined by electron microscopy for the presence or absence of pili by the following method. LB agar plates were seeded from overnight cultures of bacteria grown in LB broth. Following 6 to 8 h of growth, bacterial cells were removed by gentle washing in 3% glutaraldehyde in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and deposited on carbon-coated 400-mesh grids. After 5 min, the grid was blotted, air dried, shadow casted with palladium, and observed under a Zeiss 10C electron microscope.

Immunoblotting. Solubilized proteins were electrophoretically separated by SDS-PAGE (12.5% acrylamide [wt/vol]) as described above. Prestained molecular weight standards (Bio-Rad) were used to assess the efficiency of protein transfer to nitrocellulose membranes. Western immunoblotting was performed as described by Towbin et al. (78), using antipilin rabbit polyclonal serum.

Nucleotide sequence accession number. The nucleotide sequence of the *pilG* gene has been deposited in the GenBank data library under accession number L10831.

---

**RESULTS**

Isolation and characterization of a unique PAO pilus-defective (*pil*) mutant. Selection for resistance to pilus-specific phage is a simple strategy that has been used to isolate pilus-defective mutants of *P. aeruginosa* (6, 8, 9, 35). The *P. aeruginosa* Mu-like phages D3112 and B3 have been previously shown to require pili for the infection process and have been used successfully as selective agents in isolating pilus-defective mutants of PAO1 (60). By employing this selection method, a total of 12 spontaneous PAO1 D3112-resistant mutants from a single experiment were isolated. A preliminary analysis of these 12 mutants revealed that they all failed to release viable phage, grew equally well as the parent strain PAO1 at 30, 37, and 42°C, were motile (Fla⁺), and remained prototrophic. Macroscopic analysis also revealed that the D3112-resistant mutants had lost the ability to spread on agar plates and grew as compact, domed colonies with smooth and well-defined edges. By comparison, the parent PAO1 grew as flat, spreading colonies with

VOL. 175, 1993

PilA →
![FIG. 1. Immunoblot analysis of pili isolated from *P. aeruginosa*. The blot was incubated with antiserum to *P. aeruginosa* PAO pilin. Lanes: 1, PAO1; 2, FA2; 3, FA2/pADD693; 4, FA3.]

FIG. 1. Immunoblot analysis of pili isolated from *P. aeruginosa*. The blot was incubated with antiserum to *P. aeruginosa* PAO pilin. Lanes: 1, PAO1; 2, FA2; 3, FA2/pADD693; 4, FA3.

ragged edges (10). Phage spot screening assays revealed that 11 of these mutants were broadly resistant to all of the pilus-specific phages used in this study (D3112 cts, B3 cts3, and F116L). However, one D3112-resistant mutant remained sensitive to B3 cts3 and F116L. This unique mutant, designated FA2, was chosen for further analysis.

Plaque assays revealed that phages B3 and F116L were able to form plaques on FA2 just as well as on the parental strain PAO1, with no significant difference in plating efficiency (data not shown). In contrast, phage D3112 was not able to form recognizable plaques on lawns of FA2. However, a slight zone of lysis was noted at a high multiplicity of infection. This suggested that FA2 might be able to support a D3112 infection, albeit at a reduced level.

The ability of phage D3112 to infect FA2 was analyzed more quantitatively by using the D3112 transduction system described previously (14). PAO1, FA2, and FA1, a mutant broadly resistant to the pilus-specific phages isolated in this study, were infected with a phage lysate prepared from CD10 harboring the D3112 in vivo cloning replicon pADD948 (14) at a multiplicity of infection of 1. The transduction frequency (i.e., number of carbenicillin-resistant transductants per PFU) for each strain tested was determined. The transduction frequency for the D3112-sensitive parental strain PAO1 was \(1.4 \times 10^{-3}\). The transduction frequency for mutant FA1, however, was \(5.7 \times 10^{-8}\), which represented a \(2.4 \times 10^{4}\)-fold decrease compared with PAO1. This low transduction frequency is typical of mutants which are broadly resistant to the pilus-specific phages and incapable of producing pili (60). By comparison, the transduction frequency for mutant FA2 was \(4.8 \times 10^{-5}\), which represented only a 29-fold decrease compared with PAO1. This result demonstrated that FA2 was not nearly as resistant to D3112 as FA1, since a significant number of FA2 cells could still be transduced. More importantly, the results of this transduction experiment suggested that FA2 retained a functional phage receptor which was apparently being differentially recognized by the pilus-specific phages used in this study.

Immunoblot and electron microscopic analyses were used to determine the ability of FA2 to produce pili. Cultures of PAO1 and FA2 grown on agar plates were collected in a minimal volume of PBS, vortexed vigorously to shear the pili, and centrifuged to remove cells. The supernatant fluid was concentrated and subjected to SDS-PAGE and immunoblot analysis. Figure 1 (lane 1) shows that the parent PAO1 was capable of producing pili under these conditions, as demonstrated by the recognition of the pilin protein subunit (15 kDa) by the PAO antipilin antibody. However, under identical growth conditions little or no detectable pilin protein could be found in the FA2 sample (Fig. 1, lane 2).

![FIG. 2. Stab assay for twitching motility. LB agar (1.0%) plates were stabbed inoculated with the appropriate strains and incubated for 24 h at 37°C. The diffuse bacterial zone between the agar layer and the bottom of the polystyrene petri dish is a measure of twitching motility (45). The smaller white zones in the center represent cells growing on the top surface of the agar. Sectors: A, PAO1 (Pil⁺ Twt⁺); B, FA2 (Pil⁻ Twt⁻); C, FA2/pADD693 (Pil⁺ Twt⁺); D, PAO4141 (Pil⁺ Twt⁺); E, FA3 (Pil⁻ Twt⁻).]

FIG. 2. Stab assay for twitching motility. LB agar (1.0%) plates were stabbed inoculated with the appropriate strains and incubated for 24 h at 37°C. The diffuse bacterial zone between the agar layer and the bottom of the polystyrene petri dish is a measure of twitching motility (45). The smaller white zones in the center represent cells growing on the top surface of the agar. Sectors: A, PAO1 (Pil⁺ Twt⁺); B, FA2 (Pil⁻ Twt⁻); C, FA2/pADD693 (Pil⁺ Twt⁺); D, PAO4141 (Pil⁺ Twt⁺); E, FA3 (Pil⁻ Twt⁻).

This finding was consistent with electron microscopic analysis of FA2, which revealed the absence of filamentous polar pili (data not shown).

Twitching motility, a novel mode of flagellum-independent surface translocation, has been correlated with the presence of functional polar pili (10, 26). Mutants of *P. aeruginosa* that lack pili or contain nonretractile pili (*pil*NR) are incapable of twitching motility (10, 82). In order to determine whether FA2 could translocate across surfaces, a simple macroscopic screening assay was used to assess twitching motility. This assay is based on the previous observation that twitching-proficient (Twt⁺) strains of *Moraxella bovis* (45) and *P. aeruginosa* (12a) are capable of producing a measurable zone of spreading growth when inoculated at the bottom of an agar plate. In this assay, cells with functional pili move in a flagellum-independent manner along the interface between the agar and the bottom of the polystyrene petri dish. However, pilus-defective mutants of *P. aeruginosa*, which are incapable of twitching motility, do not migrate from the point of inoculation. Figure 2, sector A, shows that the pilated and twitching-proficient parental strain PAO1 (Pil⁺ Twt⁺) was capable of producing a spreading zone of cells in such an assay. FA2, on the other hand, was unable to spread from the point of inoculation, even after prolonged incubation (Fig. 2, sector B).

Microscopic analysis of *P. aeruginosa* slide cultures has been useful in differentiating twitching motility from other forms of surface translocation (10, 26). An examination of a PAO1 slide culture revealed the presence of characteristic motile rafts of cells at the leading edge of the moving zone (Fig. 3A) and the unique twitching movement of individual cells (10, 26). However, since FA2 was unable to spread significantly from the point of inoculation (Fig. 2, sector B),

TABLE 2. Conjugational and transductional mapping of the FA2 mutation

| Donor$^a$ | Marker(s) selected | Marker location$^b$ | Coinheritance frequency (%)$^c$ |
|-----------|---------------------|---------------------|----------------------------------|
| FA2/FP2   | Ilv$^+$ His$^+$ Lys$^+$ Met$^+$ Trp$^+$ | 0–23                          | 97 (60/62)                      |
|           | Ilv$^+$ His$^+$     | 0–7                 | 9 (4/44)                       |
|           | Lys$^+$ Met$^+$     | 10–20               | 95 (38/40)                     |
|           | Lys$^+$             | 10                  | 8 (7/87)                       |
|           | Met$^+$             | 20                  | 92 (61/66)                     |
| FA2(G101) | Met$^+$             | 20                  | 16 (15/97)                     |
| HOD1(G101)| Met$^+$             | 20                  | 73 (77/106)                    |

$a$ In every case the recipient was PAO222 Nal-1.

$b$ Numbers indicate marker locations in minutes on the revised chromosomal map (52).

$c$ Numbers in parentheses indicate the number of transconjugants containing the unselected marker (phage D3112 resistance) per number of transconjugants scored.

partial resistance to phage D3112 was coinherited at a high frequency with auxotrophic markers located within the first 23 min of the PAO chromosome (Table 2). Markers located later on the PAO chromosome showed no linkage to the FA2 pil mutation (data not shown). The D3112 resistance mutation of FA2 was coinherited at a low frequency when both the ilv and his markers (0 to 7 min) were selected. However, selection for both the lys and met markers (10 to 20 min) demonstrated a very high coinheritance with the FA2 D3112 resistance mutation (Table 2). Subsequent selection for the individual markers lys and met revealed that the D3112 phage resistance mutation was apparently tightly linked to the met-28 allele located at 20 min. The approximate map location of the FA2 pil mutation, as determined by FP2-mediated conjugation, was confirmed with G101-mediated transduction, which showed that the FA2 D3112 resistance mutation was cotransduced with the met-28 marker (Table 2).

The *P. aeruginosa* pilT locus has been previously shown to map near the proC gene (82), which is close to the met-28 marker located at 20 min. G101 transductional analysis with the pilT mutant (pil$^{NR}$), HOD1 (16), revealed that the pilus-specific phage resistance associated with the pilT mutation was even more tightly linked with the met-28 marker than the FA2 pil mutation (Table 2). Furthermore, a plasmid, designated pADD1619, which harbors the pilT gene on a 6.0-kb BamHI fragment (79, 82), was not capable of complementing FA2. These results, therefore, suggested that the FA2 pil locus was close to, but distinct from, the pilT locus. As a result, the FA2 pil locus was designated pilG1.

Complementation of the FA2 pilG1 mutation. The pilG locus was cloned by phenotypic complementation of FA2. Briefly, a HindIII-generated cosmid (pCP13) library of PAO1 DNA was mobilized into FA2, and tetracycline-resistant (Tc$^r$) transconjugants were screened visually for the presence of the distinctive wild-type colony morphology associated with pilus production and twitching motility. Several colonies with the wild-type colony morphology were identified after screening of approximately $10^4$ Tc$^r$ transconjugants. Three of these colonies were streak purified and, upon testing, were found to have regained sensitivity to phage D3112 and twitching motility, as determined by phage plaque and stab assays, respectively. Preliminary analysis of the plasmid DNA from the three phenotypically complemented transconjugants revealed that each contained, in addition to the pCP13 vector, a large (ca. 30-kb) HindIII

FIG. 3. Slide culture assay for twitching motility. *P. aeruginosa* PAO1 (A) and FA2 (B) were inoculated onto slide cultures and incubated for 6 to 12 h at 37°C. The areas photographed represent the outermost end of cell growth (magnification, ca. ×400). Bar, 5 μm.

the outer boundary of the slide culture microcolony was characterized by multiple layers of nonmotile cells forming a well-defined edge (Fig. 3B). Therefore, from these results, it was concluded that the inability of FA2 to translocate across surfaces by twitching motility was due to the lack of functional pili (Pil$^-$ Twt$^-$). Nevertheless, FA2 retained the ability to produce a receptor that could still function in the pilus-specific phage infection process.

Mapping of the FA2 pil mutation. Several loci involved in pilus biogenesis and twitching motility have been mapped to different regions of the PAO chromosome (16, 21, 82). In FP2-mediated matings, the FA2 mutation responsible for

Vol. 175, 1993

P. AERUGINOSA pilG GENE 5939

**A**

1 kb

E — X RV X — X — Sph — B RV E

Plasmid | Complementation of FA2
--- | ---
pADD698 | +
pADD2574 | +
pADD2581 | -
pADD2669 | +
pADD2670 | +

**B**

B —— 17 —— 28 —— 11 —— 6 —— 8 —— E

—— pilG ——

100 bp

FIG. 4. Analysis of the pilG locus. (A) Restriction map of the 6.2-kb EcoRI insert in pADD2564 which complements FA2 (pilG1). Lines under the restriction map indicate sequences retained in the subcloning analysis. Only pertinent restriction endonuclease sites are shown. Abbreviations: B, BamHI; E, EcoRI; RV, EcoRV; Sph, SphI; X, XhoI. (B) Sequencing strategy for the pilG gene. The nucleotide sequence of the entire 705-bp pilG region was determined by using the indicated myδ-1 insertions. The orientation of each insertion is indicated by the rectangle at each insertion point. The rightmost part of each rectangle indicates the res terminus (2).

fragment. Additional restriction analysis of these recombinant plasmids, however, suggested that they were most likely identical. Therefore, one of these recombinant plasmids, designated pADD693, was transformed into E. coli and reintroduced into FA2 by mating. All of the FA2/pADD693 transconjugants tested were complemented to the wild-type phenotype, as judged by restoration of colony morphology, D3112 sensitivity, twitching motility (Fig. 2, sector C), and PilA production (Fig. 1, lane 3), indicating that complementation was plasmid linked.

Subclones of pADD693 were generated to determine the locations of the sequences responsible for complementing the FA2 pilG mutation. From this analysis a recombinant plasmid, designated pADD698, which contained a 6.2-kb EcoRI fragment from pADD693 cloned into the unique EcoRI site of the broad-host-range vector pRO1614, was found to specifically complement the pilG1 mutation in trans (Fig. 4A). This 6.2-kb EcoRI fragment was used as a probe in Southern hybridization analysis of EcoRI and HindIII digests of PAO1 chromosomal DNA. As predicted, this probe identified EcoRI and HindIII fragments of 6.2 and >20 kb, respectively (data not shown). The 6.2-kb EcoRI fragment was also used as a probe to localize the pilG gene on the P. aeruginosa PAO physical map in order to confirm the genetic mapping data. Contour-clamped homogeneous electric field pulsed-field gel electrophoresis and hybridization analysis localized the pilG gene to the SpeI H and DpnI E fragments located at 16 to 19 min on the PAO1 chromosome (20). This result was consistent with the data presented in Table 2 and confirmed the map location of pilG.

Subsequent subcloning experiments were aimed at more precisely localizing the pilG locus within the 6.2-kb EcoRI fragment. Removal of two interior XhoI fragments from pADD698 yielded pADD2574, which retained the ability to complement the pilG1 mutation (Fig. 4A). Cloning of a 3.8-kb EcoRV fragment into the SspI site of pRO1614 resulted in a plasmid, designated pADD2581, which lost the ability to complement FA2 and suggested that the pilG locus was located near one of the ends of the 6.2-kb EcoRI fragment. The pilG locus was eventually localized first to a 1.6-kb EcoRI-SphI fragment (pADD2669) and then to an approximately 700-bp EcoRI-BamHI fragment (pADD2670) (Fig. 4A).

DNA sequence analysis of the pilG gene. The 705-bp DNA region spanning the pilG locus was sequenced on both strands by using five individual myδ-1 insertions (Fig. 4B). Several possible open reading frames (ORFs) contained entirely within the 705-bp fragment were found. However, of these, only the 405-bp ORF was likely to be the correct PilG reading frame. This determination was based on the findings that the 405-bp ORF (i) contained 53, 37, and 82% G+C at codon positions 1, 2, and 3, respectively, (ii) contained the

EcoRI
1 GAATTCCTCCGAAAAGGGGGTGGGTTGTCCGGTCGGCGGGGAGGCCGCTGGCAAGCGG 60
61 GTTTGACGCTCAGGTTGGCGCCCCGTTTGCCTTGGTCAAGGAAAAAGCCGGCCTGTTCC 120
121 GGGCATTTATGGATAGAGTTGCGTGCGAGTGTGCTAAAAAGGCTCGCGATTGGGTGCGAGCC 180
181 CGTCGGTGACAGGGCGTTAGCGCACTGAAAGAAAAACACAGAAGAATGATTCACC GAGTCGA 240
6 SD pilG
241 TATAGGGCGAACATGGAAACAGCAATCCGACGGTTTGAAAAGTGATGGTGATCGACGATTCG 300
M E Q Q S D G L K V M V I D D S
301 AAAACGATTCGTCGCACCGCCGAAAACACTGCTGAAAAAGGTCGGTTGCGACGTGATCACG 360
K T I R R T A E T L L K K V G C D V I T
361 GCAATCGACGGCTTCGATGCCCTGGCGAAGATCGCCGATACCCATCCGAACATCATTTTC 420
A I D G F D A L A K I A D T H P N I I F
SalI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Vol. 175, 1993

Km<sup>r</sup> colonies onto LB-kanamycin plates containing 5% sucrose. This procedure yielded approximately 100 sucrose-resistant (Suc<sup>r</sup>) colonies. Twenty of these Suc<sup>r</sup> colonies were tested in phage spot assays, and all were found to be D3112 resistant. Therefore, one colony, designated FA3, was chosen for further analysis.

Southern hybridization analysis was used to verify the replacement of the wild-type allele for the *pilG*::myδ-1 insertion. EcoRV and XhoI genomic digests of PAO4141 and FA3 were blotted to a nylon filter and probed with the <sup>32</sup>P-labeled 705-bp EcoRI-BamHI *pilG*-containing fragment. These enzymes were chosen for this analysis because they do not cut within the 1.8-kb myδ-1 element. Therefore, it was predicted that the probe should recognize PAO4141 EcoRV and XhoI fragments with sizes of 4.9 and 3.1 kb, respectively, and FA3 EcoRV and XhoI fragments with sizes of 6.7 and 4.9 kb, respectively. The results of the Southern analysis revealed that there was an approximately 1.8-kb shift in the hybridization pattern from PAO4141 to FA3 (data not shown). This shift in the FA3 hybridization pattern was consistent with the predicted fragment sizes of the gene replacement mutant.

Further characterization of FA3 revealed that it (i) remained auxotrophic for only methionine and proline, like the parental strain PAO4141, (ii) was broadly resistant to all of the pilus-specific phage used in this study, (iii) was nonmotile (Twt<sup>-</sup>) in twitching motility assays (Fig. 2, sector E) compared with the parental strain PAO4141 (Fig. 2, sector D), (iv) was unable to produce pili as determined by Western blot (Fig. 1, lane 4) and electron microscopic analysis (data not shown), and (v) was just as motile (Fla<sup>+</sup>) as the parent PAO4141 in semisolid agar.

To rule out possible polar effects due to the myδ-1 insertion, pADD2670, which contains the 705-bp EcoRI-BamHI *pilG*-containing fragment (Fig. 4A), was introduced into FA3, and transconjugants were tested for the restoration of twitching motility and pilus production. The presence of pADD2670 was found to restore twitching motility, sensitivity to the pilus-specific phages, and pilus production to FA3 (data not shown). This result indicated that if additional *pil* genes were located immediately downstream of *pilG*, the myδ-1 insertion had no significant polar effects on these downstream sequences.

**DISCUSSION**

This report describes the characterization of *pilG*, a new gene involved in *P. aeruginosa* pilus biosynthesis and twitching motility. The cloning of the *pilG* gene was facilitated by the isolation of a unique mutant which was identified initially from its resistance to the pilus-specific phage D3112. Although immunological and electron microscopic analyses of FA2 indicated that it was not capable of producing intact functional pili, phage plaque and D3112 transduction studies revealed that FA2 was being differentially recognized by the pilus-specific phages used in this study. Specifically, FA2 was shown to be only partially resistant to phage D3112, but it remained as sensitive as PAO1 to the pilus-specific phages B3 and F116L. This suggested that, in spite of the lack of intact pili, a functional phage receptor(s), in some form or another, was still capable of participating in the infection process.

The unique phenotype of FA2 may be explained by a possible defect in the process of pilus elongation. Even though this mutant was incapable of producing assembled filaments, it might still be capable of forming some sort of

FIG. 7. Expression of the *pilG* gene in *E. coli*. An autoradiograph of <sup>3</sup>H-amino-acid-labeled polypeptides expressed with the T7 system in *E. coli* BL21(DE3) is shown. Lanes: 1, pT7-2; 2, pT7-2 plus IPTG; 3, pADD2638; 4, pADD2638 plus IPTG; 5, pADD2664; 6, pADD2664 plus IPTG. Positions of molecular mass markers (in kilodaltons) are indicated on the left. The location of the *pilG* gene product is indicated by the arrow.

Expression of *pilG* in *E. coli*. To verify that the 405-bp ORF (Fig. 5) encodes a protein of the size predicted from the nucleotide sequence, the *pilG* gene was expressed by using the T7 RNA polymerase-promoter system (76, 77). The 705-bp fragment harboring the entire PilG coding region was cloned into vector pT7-2, and the resulting recombinant plasmid, pADD2638, was transformed into BL21(DE3). Following induction with IPTG (isopropyl-β-D-thiogalactopyranoside), proteins were labeled with <sup>3</sup>H-amino acids and analyzed by SDS-PAGE and fluorography. Compared with the IPTG-induced pT7-2 control (Fig. 7, lane 2), extracts from cells harboring pADD2638 contained one additional labeled protein (Fig. 7, lane 4). The *M*<sub>r</sub> of this protein band (15,000) closely approximated the predicted molecular weight of PilG (14,717) from the amino acid sequence, suggesting that the PilG protein was produced in *E. coli*. No insert-specific labeled polypeptides were detected when the T7 promoter was placed at the opposite end of the 705-bp fragment adjacent to the BamHI site (data not shown). The deletion of approximately 230 bp from the 3′ end of the predicted ORF (pADD2664) resulted in the apparent loss of the 15,000-Da protein (Fig. 7, lane 6). This result correlated well with the apparent loss of complementing activity when the deleted fragment was introduced into FA2 (data not shown).

Construction and analysis of a marker exchange *pilG* mutant. An allele replacement technique (69) was used to create a genetically defined *pilG* mutant. Briefly, plasmid pADD2692, which contained an myδ-1 insertion (Km<sup>r</sup>) in the PilG coding region (insertion 11 in Fig. 3B), was linearized with NotI and ligated with the oriT-sacB-containing NotI cassette of pMOB3 (69). The resulting plasmid, designated pADD2703, was mobilized into PAO4141, and plasmid integration events were detected by plating mating mixtures on selective media containing kanamycin. Curing of the unwanted DNA sequences was facilitated by streaking isolated

preliminary structure which consists simply of an exposed pilus tip at the cell surface. It is conceivable that in this abbreviated or shortened state the altered pilus structure may have the ability to limit or restrict the access of certain pilus-specific phages to the cell. The degree to which this mutant is able restrict the access of phages would, in a large part, depend upon exactly how much of the pilus tip remains exposed at the cell surface. Phages like D3112, for example, may normally adsorb to regions of the pilin subunit that are no longer readily accessible when placed in the context of an exposed tip. B3 and F116L, on the other hand, may bind to different regions of the pilin subunit that remain accessible near the surface of the cell with an exposed pilus tip. Such a selective recognition of phage by an exposed pilus tip could explain the observed differences in the phage sensitivity patterns.

The hypothesis that FA2 is producing an exposed pilus tip is similar, in many respects, to a model previously proposed to explain the phenotype of a strain of *E. coli* containing an F plasmid harboring a specific *traC* mutation, *traC1044* (66). TraC, a 99-kDa cytoplasmic protein (41, 67), has been implicated along with several other proteins specified by the *F tra* region in the assembly of the F pilus. Schandel et al. (66) showed that cells carrying the *traC1044* mutation (Arg-to-Cys substitution) failed to produce intact F pili. More importantly, they showed that the *traC1044*-containing mutant was temperature-sensitive for infection by the filamentous bacteriophage f1, which uses the tip of the pilus as a receptor, but was resistant to the icosahedral RNA phage f2, which initiates an infection by attaching to the sides of the pilus. Therefore, it seemed likely that the *traC1044* mutant was forming an exposed F-pilus tip at the cell surface instead of an extended filament (66).

More-recent studies have shown that TraC has the ability to interact with the membrane in the presence of other F-factor Tra proteins (68). This interaction with the membrane assembly complex is influenced by the structure of the carboxyl-terminal end of TraC, since the TraC1044 mutant protein, which contains the amino acid substitution in the C-terminal end, exhibits a weaker interaction with the membrane complex than the wild-type protein (68). The interaction of TraC with the assembly complex was apparently abolished in a *traC* amber mutant (66), which is broadly resistant to both phages f1 and f2. Therefore, even though the exact role of TraC in F-pilus production has not been elucidated, the results to date suggest that TraC may function in the assembly and extension of the pilus after the formation of some preliminary pilus structure (66).

The nature of the *pilG1* mutation is not known. However, if it was a simple amino acid substitution (as was the case for TraC1044), it is possible that the PilG1 mutant protein might still be capable of interacting, either directly or indirectly, with the cytoplasmic face of the *P. aeruginosa* pilus assembly complex. Even though this interaction would not be sufficient to produce assembled pili, it might still allow the cell to form an exposed pilus tip. A result consistent with this hypothesis was the discovery that the insertional inactivated *pilG* mutant FA3 was broadly resistant to the pilus-specific phages, presumably because it was incapable of forming the altered pilus structure (i.e., exposed pilus tip). This result is very similar to the situation seen with the *FtraC* amber mutant (66).

The predicted amino acid sequence of PilG revealed significant homology to the enteric, single-domain response regulator CheY (44, 72), whose activity has been shown to be controlled by phosphorylation (4). Phosphorylation causes CheY to interact with the flagellar motor-switch components and is the signal required for clockwise flagellar rotation. It has been suggested that phosphorylation activates CheY through a conformational change of the signaling surface, which results in either increased affinity to the flagellar switch or increased ability to communicate the signal to the switch once CheY is bound (59). The amino acid residues that correspond to the CheY residues Asp-13, Asp-57, and Lys-109 constitute the phosphorylation active site and therefore tend to be conserved among all response regulator domains (73). In the nonphosphorylated form of CheY, Asp-57 and Lys-109 are thought to form a bond which holds the C-terminal protein in a particular conformation. Phosphorylation at the Asp-57 residue (5) affects the Asp-57–Lys-109 bond, consequently altering the conformation of CheY (39). The predicted amino acid sequence of the *P. aeruginosa* PilG protein contained not only residues that corresponded to the CheY hydrophobic core, which is thought to be important for maintaining important secondary and tertiary structures, but also the conserved residues that define the response regulator active site (Fig. 6). Therefore, even in the absence of direct biochemical evidence of phosphorylation, the extensive sequence similarity that defines the response regulator domain suggests that PilG may retain a conserved phosphotransfer enzymology and, like CheY, may also function as a response regulator by directing pilus production within its respective signal transduction network.

In spite of the homology to the enterobacterial chemotaxis protein CheY, two lines of evidence suggest that PilG is involved in pilus biosynthesis and not in directing flagellar rotation. First, the *P. aeruginosa* homolog of the enterobacterial *cheY* gene has been recently cloned and sequenced (71). The *P. aeruginosa cheY* homolog was found immediately downstream of the *fliA* gene, which encodes the sigma factor of RNA polymerase used to transcribe the flagellin gene (71). This *fliA-cheY* gene region has recently been localized to a region of the *P. aeruginosa* PAO physical map that corresponds to 59 to 61 min on the genetic map (21), a considerable distance from the *pilG* locus. Second, enteric *cheY* mutants are counterclockwise biased (i.e., they swim for extended periods without tumbling) and show only a slight degree of spreading in swarm plate assays. However, both of the *pilG* mutants used in this study (FA2 and FA3) were just as motile in semisolid-agar motility (flagellar) assays as the parental strains. Therefore, on the basis of the observations in this study, it is unlikely that PilG is involved in flagellum-mediated chemotaxis.

In conclusion, the results of this study suggest that PilG is likely to play a major role in directing the assembly of the *P. aeruginosa* pilin subunits. The striking sequence similarity to CheY suggests that PilG acts as a single-domain response regulator whose function may be to receive a certain environmental signal(s) and then transduce that signal to the pilus assembly machinery via specific protein-protein interactions. Experiments aimed at determining the ability of PilG to be phosphorylated, the nature of the environmental signal that induces the phosphorylation of PilG, the identity of its cognate sensor-protein kinase, and the specific interaction of PilG with protein complexes are in progress. Furthermore, preliminary nucleotide analysis and expression studies of sequences downstream of *pilG* have revealed the presence of several additional genes that may be cotranscribed along with *pilG* as a polycistronic message. Therefore, these downstream sequences are also currently being

investigated for their involvement in pilus production and twitching motility.

# ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by a grant from the American Lung Association to A. Darzins. I thank William Paranchych for kindly supplying the PAO pilin antisera, Mark Fahrina for mapping the *pilG* locus by contour-clamped homogeneous electric field hybridization, and my colleagues listed in Table 1 for providing strains and plasmids.

# REFERENCES

1. Albright, L. M., E. Huala, and F. M. Ausubel. 1989. Prokaryotic signal transduction mediated by sensor and regulator protein pairs. Annu. Rev. Genet. 23:311–336.
2. Berg, C. M., N. B. Vartak, G. Wang, X. Xu, L. Liu, D. J. MacNeil, K. M. Gewain, L. A. Wiater, and D. E. Berg. 1992. The *myδ-1* element, a small γδ(Tn1000) derivative useful for plasmid mutagenesis, allele replacement and DNA sequencing. Gene 113:9–16.
3. Birnboim, H. C., and J. Doly. 1979. A rapid alkaline extraction procedure for screening recombinant plasmid DNA. Nucleic Acids Res. 7:1513–1523.
4. Bourret, R. B., K. A. Borkovich, and M. I. Simon. 1991. Signal transduction pathways involving protein phosphorylation in prokaryotes. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 60:401–441.
5. Bourret, R. B., J. F. Hess, and M. I. Simon. 1990. Conserved aspartate residues and phosphorylation in signal transduction by the chemotaxis protein CheY. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 87:41–45.
6. Bradley, D. E. 1972. A study of pili on *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Genet. Res. 19:39–51.
7. Bradley, D. E. 1973. Basic characterization of a *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* pilus-dependent bacteriophage with a long noncontractile tail. J. Virol. 12:1139–1148.
8. Bradley, D. E. 1974. The adsorption of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* pilus-dependent bacteriophages to a host mutant with nonretractile pili. Virology 58:149–163.
9. Bradley, D. E. 1974. Pilus-dependence of four *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* bacteriophages with non-contractile tails. J. Gen. Virol. 23:1–15.
10. Bradley, D. E. 1980. A function of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* PAO polar pili: twitching motility. Can. J. Microbiol. 26:146–154.
11. Brammer, W. J., and P. H. Clarke. 1964. Induction and repression of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* amidase. J. Gen. Microbiol. 37:307–319.
12. Chamberlain, J. P. 1979. Fluorographic detection of radioactivity in polyacrylamide gels with the water soluble fluor, sodium salicylate. Anal. Biochem. 98:132–135.
12a. Darzins, A. Unpublished data.
13. Darzins, A., and M. J. Casadaban. 1989. Mini-D3112 bacteriophage transposable elements for genetic analysis of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. J. Bacteriol. 171:3909–3916.
14. Darzins, A., and M. J. Casadaban. 1989. In vivo cloning of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* genes with mini-D3112 transposable bacteriophage. J. Bacteriol. 171:3917–3925.
15. Darzins, A., and A. M. Chakrabarty. 1984. Cloning of genes controlling alginate biosynthesis from a mucoid cystic fibrosis isolate of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. J. Bacteriol. 159:9–18.
16. Darzins, A., M. R. Russell, and P. L. Truax. 1990. Isolation, mapping, and complementation of pili-defective mutants of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* PAO1, D-35, p. 86. Abstr. 90th Annu. Meet. Am. Soc. Microbiol. 1990. American Society for Microbiology, Washington, D.C.
17. Darzins, A., S.-K. Wang, R. I. Vanags, and A. M. Chakrabarty. 1985. Clustering of mutations affecting alginate acid biosynthesis in mucoid *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. J. Bacteriol. 164:516–524.
18. Doig, P., T. Todd, P. A. Sastry, K. K. Lee, R. S. Hodges, W. Paranchych, and R. T. Irvin. 1988. Role of pili in adhesion of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* to human respiratory epithelial cells. Infect. Immun. 56:1641–1646.
19. Dreyfuss, G., S. A. Adam, and Y. D. Choi. 1984. Physical change in cytoplasmic messenger ribonucleoproteins in cells treated with inhibitor of mRNA transcription. Mol. Cell. Biol. 4:415–423.
20. Farinha, M., and W. Paranchych (University of Alberta). 1991. Personal communication.
21. Farinha, M. A., S. L. Ronald, A. M. Kropinski, and W. Paranchych. 1993. Localization of the virulence-associated genes *pilA*, *pilR*, *rpoN*, *fliA*, *fliC*, *ent*, and *fbp* on the physical map of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* PAO1 by pulsed-field electrophoresis. Infect. Immun. 61:1571–1575.
22. Figurski, D. H., and D. R. Helinski. 1979. Replication of an origin-containing derivative of plasmid RK2 dependent on a plasmid function in trans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 76:1648–1652.
23. Groisman, E. A., N. Pagratis, and M. J. Casadaban. 1991. Genome mapping and protein coding region identification using bacteriophage Mu. Gene 99:1–7.
24. Haas, D. 1983. Genetic aspects of biodegradation by pseudomonads. Experientia 39:1199–1213.
25. Hasan, N., and W. Szybalski. 1987. Control of cloned gene expression by promoter inversion in vivo: construction of improved vectors with a multiple cloning site and the *Ptac* promoter. Gene 56:145–151.
26. Henrichsen, J. 1983. Twitching motility. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 37:81–93.
27. Holloway, B. W. 1955. Genetic recombination in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. J. Gen. Microbiol. 13:572–581.
28. Holloway, B. W., J. B. Egan, and M. Monk. 1960. Lysogeny in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Aust. J. Exp. Biol. Med. Sci. 38:321–330.
29. Holloway, B. W., V. Krishnapillai, and A. F. Morgan. 1979. Chromosomal genetics of *Pseudomonas*. Microbiol. Rev. 43:73–102.
30. Holmes, D. S., and M. Quigley. 1981. A rapid boiling method for the preparation of bacterial plasmids. Anal. Biochem. 114:193–197.
31. Iglewski, B. 1989. Probing *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*, an opportunistic pathogen. ASM News 55:303–307.
32. Ishimoto, K. S., and S. Lory. 1989. Formation of pilin in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* requires the alternative sigma factor (RpoN) of RNA polymerase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 86:1954–1957.
33. Ishimoto, K. S., and S. Lory. 1992. Identification of *pilR*, which encodes a transcriptional activator of the *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* pilin gene. J. Bacteriol. 174:3514–3521.
34. Johanson, W. G., J. H. Higuchi, T. R. Chaudhuri, and D. E. Woods. 1980. Bacterial adherence to epithelial cells in bacillary colonization of the respiratory tract. Am. Rev. Respir. Dis. 121:55–63.
35. Johnson, K., and S. Lory. 1987. Characterization of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* mutants with altered piliation. J. Bacteriol. 169:5663–5667.
36. Krishnapillai, V. 1971. A novel transducing phage. Its role in recognition of a possible new host controlled modification system in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Mol. Gen. Genet. 114:134–143.
37. Krylov, V. N., V. G. Bogush, and J. Shapiro. 1980. Bacteriophage of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* with DNA similar in structure to that of phage Mu. I. General description, localization of sites sensitive to endonucleases in DNA, and structure of homoduplexes of phage D3112. Genetika 16:824–832.
38. Kupersztoch, Y., and D. Helinski. 1973. A catenated DNA molecule as an intermediate in the replication of the resistance factor R6K in *Escherichia coli*. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 54:1451–1459.
39. Lukat, G. S., B. H. Lee, J. M. Mottonen, A. M. Stock, and J. B. Stock. 1991. Roles of the highly conserved aspartate and lysine residues in the response regulator of bacterial chemotaxis. J. Biol. Chem. 266:8348–8354.
40. Mandel, M., and A. Higa. 1970. Calcium-dependent bacteriophage DNA infection. J. Mol. Biol. 53:159–162.
41. Manning, P. A., G. Morelli, and M. Achtman. 1981. TraG

protein of the F sex factor of *Escherichia coli* K-12 and its role in conjugation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 78:7487–7491.

42. Marmur, J. 1961. A procedure for the isolation of deoxyribonucleic acid from microorganisms. J. Mol. Biol. 3:208–218.

43. Matsumoto, H., T. Nakazawa, S. Ohta, and Y. Terawaki. 1981. Chromosomal locations of *catA*, *pobA*, *pcaA*, *dcu* and *chu* genes in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Genet. Res. 38:251–266.

44. Matsumura, P., J. J. Rydel, R. Linzmeier, and D. Vacante. 1984. Overexpression and sequence of the *Escherichia coli cheY* gene and biochemical activities of the CheY protein. J. Bacteriol. 160:36–41.

45. McMichael, J. C. 1992. Bacterial differentiation within *Mycobacterium bovis* colonies growing at the interface of the agar medium with the Petri dish. J. Gen. Microbiol. 138:2687–2695.

46. Miller, R. V., and C.-M. C. Ku. 1978. Characterization of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* mutants deficient in the establishment of lysogeny. J. Bacteriol. 134:875–883.

47. Morrison, D. A. 1979. Transformation and preservation of competent bacterial cells by freezing. Methods Enzymol. 68:326–331.

48. Mutoh, N., and M. I. Simon. 1986. Nucleotide sequence corresponding to five chemotaxis genes in *Escherichia coli*. J. Bacteriol. 165:161–166.

49. Nunn, D., S. Bergman, and S. Lory. 1990. Products of three accessory genes, *pilB*, *pilC*, and *pilD*, are required for biogenesis of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* pili. J. Bacteriol. 172:2911–2919.

50. Nunn, D. N., and S. Lory. 1991. Product of the *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* gene *pilD* is a prepilin leader peptidase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 88:3281–3285.

51. Nunn, D. N., and S. Lory. 1992. Components of the protein-excretion apparatus of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* are processed by the type IV prepilin peptidase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 89:47–51.

52. O’Hoy, K., and V. Krishnapillai. 1987. Calibration of the *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* strain PAO chromosome map in time units using high-frequency-of-recombination donors. Genetics 115:611–618.

53. Olsen, R. H., G. DeBusscher, and W. R. McCombie. 1982. Development of broad-host-range vectors and gene banks: self-cloning of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* PAO chromosome. J. Bacteriol. 150:60–69.

54. Paranchych, W., and L. S. Frost. 1988. The physiology and biochemistry of pili. Adv. Microb. Physiol. 29:53–113.

55. Pemberton, J. M. 1973. F116: a DNA bacteriophage specific for the pili of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* strain PAO. Virology 55:558–560.

56. Ramphal, R., and M. Pyle. 1983. Evidence for mucins and sialic acid as receptors for *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* in the lower respiratory tract. Infect. Immun. 41:339–344.

57. Ramphal, R., J. C. Saddoff, M. Pyle, and J. D. Silipigni. 1984. Role of pili in the adherence of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* to injured tracheal epithelium. Infect. Immun. 44:38–40.

58. Rehmat, S., and J. A. Shapiro. 1983. Insertion and replication of the *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* mutator phage D3112. Mol. Gen. Genet. 192:416–423.

59. Roman, S. J., M. Meyers, K. Volz, and P. Matsumura. 1992. A chemotactic signaling surface on CheY defined by suppressors of flagellar switch mutations. J. Bacteriol. 174:6247–6255.

60. Roncero, C., A. Darzins, and M. J. Casadaban. 1990. *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* transposable bacteriophages D3112 and B3 require pili and surface growth for adsorption. J. Bacteriol. 172:1899–1904.

61. Royle, P. L., H. Matsumoto, and B. W. Holloway. 1981. Genetic circularity of the *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* PAO chromosome. J. Bacteriol. 145:145–155.

62. Sadler, J., M. Tecklenberg, and J. Betz. 1980. Plasmids containing many tandem copies of a synthetic lactose operator. Gene 8:279–300.

63. Sanger, F. A., S. Nicklen, and A. R. Coulson. 1977. DNA sequencing with chain-terminating inhibitors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 74:5463–5467.

64. Sastry, P. A., B. B. Finlay, B. L. Pasloske, W. Paranchych, J. R.


Pearlstone, and L. B. Smillie. 1985. Comparative studies of the amino acid and nucleotide sequences of pilin derived from *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* PAK and PAO. J. Bacteriol. 164:571–577.

65. Sato, H., K. Okinaga, and H. Saito. 1988. Role of pili in the pathogenesis of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* burn infection. Microbiol. Immunol. 32:131–139.

66. Schandel, K. A., S. Maneewannakul, K. Ippen-Ihler, and R. E. Webster. 1987. A *traC* mutant that retains sensitivity to fl bacteriophage but lacks F pili. J. Bacteriol. 169:3151–3159.

67. Schandel, K. A., S. Maneewannakul, R. A. Vonder Haar, K. Ippen-Ihler, and R. E. Webster. 1990. Nucleotide sequence of the F plasmid gene *traC*, and identification of its product. Gene 96:137–140.

68. Schandel, K. A., M. M. Muller, and R. E. Webster. 1992. Localization of TraC, a protein involved in assembly of the F conjugative pilus. J. Bacteriol. 174:3800–3806.

69. Schweizer, H. P. 1992. Allelic exchange in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* using novel ColEl-type vectors and a family of cassettes containing a portable *oriT* and the counter-selectable *Bacillus subtilis sacB* marker. Mol. Microbiol. 6:1195–1204.

70. Simon, R., U. Priefer, and A. Puhler. 1983. A broad host range mobilization system for *in vivo* genetic engineering: transposon mutagenesis in gram negative bacteria. Bio/Technology 1:784–790.

71. Starnbach, M. N., and S. Lory. 1992. The *fliA (rpoF)* gene of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* encodes an alternative sigma factor required for flagellin synthesis. Mol. Microbiol. 6:459–469.

72. Stock, A., D. E. Koshland, and J. Stock. 1985. Homologies between the *Salmonella typhimurium* CheY protein and proteins involved in the regulation of chemotaxis, membrane protein synthesis, and sporulation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 82:7989–7993.

73. Stock, J. B., A. J. Ninfa, and A. M. Stock. 1989. Protein phosphorylation and regulation of adaptive responses in bacteria. Microbiol. Rev. 53:450–490.

74. Strathmann, M., B. A. Hamilton, C. A. Amyueda, M. I. Simon, E. M. Meyerowitz, and M. J. Palazzolo. 1991. Transposon-facilitated DNA sequencing. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 88:1247–1250.

75. Strom, M. S., D. Nunn, and S. Lory. 1991. Multiple roles of the pilus biogenesis protein PilD: involvement of PilD in excretion of enzymes from *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. J. Bacteriol. 173:1175–1180.

76. Studier, F. W., and B. A. Moffatt. 1986. Use of bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase to direct selective high-level expression of cloned genes. J. Mol. Biol. 189:113–130.

77. Tabor, S., and C. C. Richardson. 1985. A bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase/promoter system for controlled expression of specific genes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 82:1074–1078.

78. Towbin, H., T. Staehelin, and J. Gordon. 1979. Electrophoretic transfer of proteins from polyacrylamide gels to nitrocellulose sheets: procedure and some applications. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 76:4350–4354.

79. Truax, P., and A. Darzins. 1992. Characterization of the *Pseudomonas aeruginosa pilT* locus involved in pilus retraction and twitching motility, I-39, p. 243. Abstr. 92nd Gen. Meet. Am. Soc. Microbiol. 1992. American Society for Microbiology, Washington, D.C.

80. Vogelstein, B., and D. Gillespie. 1979. Preparative and analytical purification of DNA from agarose. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 76:615–619.

81. West, S. E. H., and B. H. Iglewski. 1988. Codon usage in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Nucleic Acids Res. 16:9323–9334.

82. Whitchurch, C. B., M. Hobbs, S. P. Livingston, V. Krishnapillai, and J. S. Mattick. 1991. Characterization of a *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* twitching motility gene and evidence for a specialized protein export system widespread in eubacteria. Gene 101:33–44.

83. Woods, D. E., D. C. Strauss, W. G. Johanson, Jr., V. K. Berry, and J. A. Bass. 1980. Role of pili in adherence of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* to mammalian buccal epithelial cells. Infect. Immun. 29:1146–1151.
