
Prog. Lipid Res. Vol. 33, No. 1/2, pp. 55–69, 1994  
Copyright © 1994 Elsevier Science Ltd  
Printed in Great Britain. All rights reserved  
0163-7827/94/$24.00  

# BIOSYNTHESIS OF VERY LONG CHAIN FATTY ACIDS IN HIGHER PLANTS

C. CASSAGNE,* R. LESSIRE, J. J. BESSOULE, P. MOREAU, A. CREACH, F. SCHNEIDER and B. STURBOIS  

Institut de Biochimie Cellulaire, 1 rue Camille Saint-Saëns, 33077 Bordeaux, France  

## CONTENTS

| Section                          | Page |
|----------------------------------|------|
| **ABBREVIATIONS**                | 55   |
| I. INTRODUCTION                  | 55   |
| A. Very long chain fatty acids   | 55   |
| B. In vivo very long chain fatty acid biosynthesis in higher plants | 56   |
| II. In Vitro BIOSYNTHESIS OF VLCFAs | 57   |
| A. Substrates of the elongation  | 57   |
| 1. Substrates of the seed elongases | 57   |
| 2. Substrates of the elongases in leek epidermal cells | 57   |
| B. Products of the acyl-CoA elongases | 58   |
| C. The reduction steps           | 59   |
| D. Intermediates in the elongation mechanism | 60   |
| III. SOLUBILIZATION AND PURIFICATION OF PLANT ACYL-COA ELONGASES | 61   |
| A. Solubilization and purification of leek elongases | 61   |
| B. Solubilization and purification of acyl-CoA elongases from developing seeds | 61   |
| C. Organization of the acyl-CoA elongases | 62   |
| D. Modulation of the activity by the membranes | 62   |
| IV. LOCALIZATION OF THE ELONGASES | 64   |
| A. Localization of the leaf elongases | 64   |
| B. Localization of the acyl-CoA elongases in developing seeds | 64   |
| 1. Limnanthes alba               | 64   |
| 2. Erucic acid-forming seeds     | 64   |
| C. How the VLCFAs reach the plasma membrane: lipid transfer | 65   |
| V. CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES   | 67   |
| ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS                 | 67   |
| REFERENCES                       | 67   |

## ABBREVIATIONS

| Abbreviation | Full Form                     | Abbreviation | Full Form                      |
|--------------|-------------------------------|--------------|---------------------------------|
| ER           | Endoplasmic reticulum         | NL           | Neutral lipids                 |
| GA           | Golgi apparatus               | PC           | Phosphatidylcholine            |
| HPTLC        | High-performance thin-layer   | PE           | Phosphatidylethanolamine       |
|              | chromatography                | PM           | Plasma membrane                |
| LRVs         | Lipid-rich vesicles           | VLCFA        | Very long chain fatty acid     |

## I. INTRODUCTION

### A. Very Long Chain Fatty Acids

Very long chain fatty acids (VLCFAs), i.e., fatty acids having at least 20 carbon atoms, are abundant in the living world. They have been considered as characteristic of the external 'barrier' lipids in mammalian waxes,¹ marine waxes,² insect waxes³ and, of course, plant waxes.⁴ Free VLCFAs are common, but minor components and they are encountered esterified to various hydroxy groups and particularly to wax alcohols. Though their percentage is low, they are particularly important, because they are the substrates of

*Author to whom all correspondence should be sent.
wax-forming enzymes. The most common chain lengths of the wax fatty acids lie in the C₂₀–C₃₆ range and the aliphatic chains are mostly saturated.⁵ VLCFAs are not restricted to the external lipids, and their occurrence has long been known in developing seeds,⁶ where they may account for as much as two thirds of the total fatty acids (esterified either to glycerol, as erucic acid in rape seed, or to fatty alcohols in the case of Jojoba (Simmondsia chinensis)⁷ and even 90% of total fatty acids in meadowfoam).⁸,¹⁰

In developing-seed storage lipids, VLCFAs are mostly monounsaturated and belong chiefly to the *cis* (*n*-9) series, i.e. oleic acid and higher homologues;⁹,¹⁰ fatty acids of the *cis* (*n*-7) series have also been found in the developing seeds from Sinapis alba and from various cultivars of Brassica napus;¹⁰⁻¹² their contribution never exceeds 3–20% of the corresponding (*n*-9) isomer and is restricted to *cis* (*n*-7) 18:1¹²,¹³ (vaccenic acid) and *cis* (*n*-7) 20:1.

Besides the major unsaturated fatty acids, unusual ethylenic VLCFAs are also encountered in the seeds of a few species;⁹,¹⁰ this is the case of the VLCFA bearing a *cis* double bond between the carbons 5 and 6 of the aliphatic chain, as observed in Limnanthes douglasii⁹,¹⁰ and Limnanthes alba.⁸

Very long monounsaturated fatty acids are of particular importance for the oleochemical industries and the need for renewable raw materials has led to an extensive research of the lipid content of seeds, with special emphasis on their very long chain content and biosynthesis.¹⁴,¹⁵ VLCFAs are also membrane constituents and have been shown to account for about 5–10% of the acyl moieties of the plasma membrane in higher plants¹⁶⁻¹⁹ and yeast;²⁰ in animals, they are present in the plasma membrane of all types of cells where they have been investigated, but are chiefly very minor components. The highest proportion of VLCFAs in membranes, whatever their origin, is certainly found in the myelin of the PNS and of the CNS, where they can account for as much as 40% of the total fatty acids in the most specific myelin lipids (sphingolipids).²¹⁻²³ The membrane VLCFAs are either saturated, or unsaturated, and their chain length comprises between 20 and 28 carbon atoms, external VLCFAs having longer chains than internal VLCFAs. It is clear from this very rapid presentation that VLCFAs are common components of a great number of tissues and structures, where they are not likely to play the same physiological roles.

Their biosynthesis has been studied after [1-¹⁴C]acetate, or labeled fatty acid incorporation in a variety of animal²²,²⁴⁻²⁸ and plant tissues (for reviews,¹⁷,²⁹⁻³²).

### B. In Vivo Very Long Chain Fatty Acid Biosynthesis in Higher Plants

The first indications came from the [1-¹⁴C]acetate incorporation in seedling tissues of gramineae.³³ A characteristic feature of the synthesis was the high proportion of saturated C₂₀–C₂₆ fatty acids formed from [1-¹⁴C]acetate. Interestingly, after incubation, the radioactive VLCFAs were exclusively associated with membrane fractions; they were found in the neutral lipids and, to a far lesser extent, in polar lipids; the carboxyl labeling of all the saturated fatty acids synthesized from [1-¹⁴C]acetate suggested that an elongation had occurred for VLCFA biosynthesis rather than a *de novo* synthesis. The elongation pathway relevant to wax formation has been studied in a large number of plant tissues.²⁹⁻³² The analysis of the label in the various fatty acids synthesized from [1-¹⁴C]acetate by leek epidermis suggested the involvement of multiple elongation systems.³⁴ Indirect evidence for this hypothesis was obtained from the differential effects of inhibitors on VLCFA synthesis, as summarized in Ref. 34.

Indications that the sequence of *in vivo* fatty acid elongation was controlled by three separate elongase enzymes in potato were obtained after treatment with various inhibitors.³⁵ Genetic evidence supported the presence of various elongating systems in higher plants.³¹,³⁶,³⁷

The data summarized above delineate the existence of enzymes catalysing the biosynthesis of the various very long chain fatty acids. These enzymes have been studied after the obtention of functional cell-free extracts.
Until recently, the mechanisms by which the VLCFAs are synthesized have been extrapolated from what is known, or suspected, about mammalian elongases.²²,²⁴–²⁸ The purification of the plant elongases has allowed great advances in our knowledge concerning the possible structure of these enzymes, as well as their functioning and, in particular, the role played by the lipid environment of the enzyme within the membrane with regard to their activity.

## II. IN VITRO BIOSYNTHESIS OF VLCFAs

### A. Substrates of the Elongation

It was shown very early that malonyl-CoA, but not acetyl-CoA (or acetyl-ACP), is the two-carbon unit donor.³⁸ In many cases,¹⁶,³⁹ an addition of ACP had no effect on, or partially inhibited the reaction, but a slight stimulation was observed in a particulate preparation from germinating pea.

In this particular case, stearic acid was elongated more effectively than stearoyl-CoA.⁴⁰ Neither stearoyl-CoA nor stearoyl-ACP were utilized for VLCFA formation.⁴¹,⁴² In almost all the other plant systems studied so far an activated form of the fatty acids has been suggested to play the role of substrate of the elongase and two likely candidates have been examined. In most cases, long chain acyl-CoAs are accepted by the membrane-bound elongases and yield VLCFAs, whereas long chain acyl-ACPs have been shown to be elongated in very few cases.

### 1. Substrates of the Seed Elongases

The case of Jojoba (*Simmondsia chinensis*) appears unique in higher plants in that it is able to elongate almost equally well long chain acyl-CoAs (9–23% of administered) and C₁₈-ACP (34% of administered). Another remarkable feature is that C₁₈:₁ (*n*-9) *cis* CoA and higher homologues (C₂₀:₁ CoA and C₂₂:₁ CoA) were elongated as well as C₁₈ CoA, whereas short chain acyl-CoAs were not—or only poorly elongated.⁴³ The elongases of Jojoba seem—if these characteristics are confirmed—to be indifferent *in vitro* to the nature of the acyl chain length and/or activated form.

This situation is far from common and, in most seeds, not only the acyl-CoAs are the major substrates of the elongases, but there is a strict discrimination between saturated and unsaturated acyl-CoAs.

*In vivo*, however, the Jojoba seed does not contain saturated VLCFAs, or alcohols, so that either the specificity of the elongases is modified *in vitro*, or the C₁₈-CoA and/or C₁₈-ACP are not available *in vivo*, because of the high activity of the C₁₈-ACP desaturase.⁴⁴

The elongase of developing honesty seeds accepts numerous acyl-CoAs as substrates in the C₁₄–C₂₄ range, with a marked preference for the saturated, or monounsaturated C₁₈ and C₂₀-CoAs. No difference in the elongation rate was observed when using saturated, or unsaturated acyl-CoAs.⁴⁵

Meadowfoam seeds incubated with palmitic acid, stearic acid, oleic acid and (*n*-9) eicosenoic acid, formed the C₂₀ and C₂₂ fatty acids containing the unusual Δ5 double bond.⁴⁶ Palmitic acid seemed to play a prominent role as a precursor of 20:1Δ5 biosynthesis.⁴⁶ A cell-free homogenate exhibited an equal ability to form C20 and C20:1Δ5 fatty acyl chains from palmitoyl-CoA and stearoyl-CoA,⁴⁶,⁴⁷ whereas C₂₀-CoA was poorly elongated.⁴⁶,⁴⁷ The high specificity of the elongase towards the chain length and/or the degree of unsaturation of the acyl-CoAs was recently confirmed with rapeseed homogenates. C₁₈:₁-CoA and C₂₀:₁-CoA were elongated by homogenates from developing embryos of rapeseed.⁴⁸ All saturated (C₁₄–C₂₂) and monounsaturated (C₁₈:₁–C₂₂:₁) acyl-CoAs used as potential substrates were accepted by the elongase of a rapeseed homogenate.⁴⁹

### 2. Substrates of the Elongases in Leek Epidermal Cells

In the microsomes from leek epidermal cells, stearic acid may to some extent replace stearoyl-CoA, provided that CoASH and ATP are added to the reaction mixture,¹⁶ because
of the presence of an acyl-CoA synthetase yielding acyl-CoA from free fatty acids and CoA;⁵⁰ the replacement of CoASH by ACP resulted in a marked decrease of the activity, even though the presence of an acyl-ACP synthetase was demonstrated.⁵¹ All the saturated acyl-CoAs could be elongated to a series of higher homologues,⁵²,⁵³ in marked contrast to the oleoyl-CoA and the linoleoyl-CoA, which are not primers of the elongase.⁵² It was hypothesized that leek epidermal cell has a mechanism for the exclusion of unsaturated acyl-CoAs from its elongation system(s).⁵² If present, this mechanism is highly selective, since the *cis* C₂₀:₁-CoA (*n*-9) and *cis* C₂₂:₁-CoA (*n*-9) were accepted by the elongases⁵⁴ and only the unsaturated C₁₈ acyl chains were excluded from the elongation, despite their abundance in the microsomes. Whether these unsaturated C₁₈-CoAs are sequestered in phospholipids so rapidly that they are unable to reach the elongases, or whether the acyl-CoA elongases simply do not accept them, remained obscure until it was shown that the purified enzyme devoid of transacylase activity elongated almost any saturated acyl-CoA in the C₁₂–C₂₄ range and oleoyl-CoA.⁵⁵

In the case of the leek, the absence of oleoyl-CoA elongation is not a characteristic of the elongase, but results from the organization of the membrane and from the competition of the other microsomal enzymes for the substrate.

As expected for an elongation mechanism, C₁₈-CoA and malonyl-CoA incorporations are identical for the C₂₀ synthesis, whereas malonyl-CoA incorporation into C₂₂ and C₂₄ is two and three times higher, respectively, than that of C₁₈-CoA. This demonstrates that when exogenous acyl-CoAs are used, no elongation of endogenous acyl-CoAs can occur and that there is only a sequential elongation of the primer C₁₈-CoA by malonyl-CoA.⁵³

Besides this acyl-CoA elongation, VLCFA formation from endogenous precursors has been observed in microsomes from epidermal cells of *Allium porrum*.⁵² This synthesis exhibits an absolute requirement for ATP, which cannot be replaced by any other nucleotide triphosphate.⁵² The lack of exogenous CoA requirement suggested the presence of endogenous CoA, and it was hypothesized that ATP participates in the formation of acyl-CoAs from endogenous fatty acids and endogenous CoAs. Accordingly, microsomes preincubated in a CoA-depleting system lost the ability to elongate the endogenous precursor. The elongating activity was restored only upon addition of CoASH, ATP and Mg²⁺.⁵⁴

However, the elongase(s) using the endogenous substrates differ(s) in many respects from the acyl-CoA elongases.

(1) In marked contrast to acyl-CoA elongases, the VLCFAs are formed by an unique malonyl-CoA condensation with the immediate precursors. The implication of this is that there is a pool of endogenous precursors (C₁₈ to C₂₄ free fatty acids?). Since the highest VLCFA formation is that of C₂₂ to C₂₄, it is concluded that the C₂₀–C₂₂ endogenous pool should be higher than the C₁₈ pool.

(2) Acyl-CoA elongation and elongation of endogenous unknown substrates are located in different membranes (see below); when separated from the acyl-CoA elongase, the endogenous elongation does not accept exogenous acyl-CoAs.

A simple calculation shows that the endogenous fatty acid pool should be high and reach about 4% of total membrane lipids. However, such high levels have not been observed and other possibilities should therefore be considered. For example, the substrates likely to be used for endogenous elongation could be formed and elongated without accumulating in the membrane.

## B. Products of the Acyl-CoA Elongases

The question of the nature of the products released from the elongases has been clearly resolved only in the case of the acyl-CoA elongases. The first indication that, in higher plants, the products of the acyl-CoA elongases were released as acyl-CoAs was obtained in Jojoba seeds.⁴³ This has since been confirmed and, in developing seeds, the data gathered so far tend towards the conclusion that the VLCFAs released from the acyl-CoA elongases are thioesterified to CoASH.Very-long-chain acyl-CoAs were rapidly formed from labeled oleoyl-CoA by a particulate fraction of developing rapeseed before appearing in triacylglycerols.⁴⁹ While studying the biosynthesis of acyl lipids in *Brassica napus* embryos, Taylor *et al.*⁴⁸ clearly demonstrated the presence of VLCFA-CoAs formed from oleoyl-CoA by a 15,000 g particulate fraction. A particulate fraction from developing seeds of honesty (*Lunaria annua*) formed VLCFA-CoAs from long-chain acyl-CoAs;⁴⁵ the postulated acyl-CoA intermediates were also evidenced.⁴⁶ In leek epidermis, Abdul-Karim *et al.*⁵⁶ obtained indirect evidence for the release of very long chain acyl-CoAs followed by the insertion of their acyl moieties into phospholipids and neutral lipids. A kinetic study⁵⁷ of the elongation of stearoyl-CoA by leek epidermis microsomes was followed by the resolution of the malonyl-CoA, long chain acyl-CoAs, PC, PE, glycolipids and neutral lipids by HPTLC of the whole reaction mixture. After a 10 min incubation, all the labeled VLCFAs were found in the acyl-CoA fraction and only then did these appear progressively in phospholipids (chiefly PC) and in neutral lipids; after 60 min, 10% of the PC label was due to VLCFA. Very long chain acyl-CoAs were poorly synthesized, whereas long chain acyl-CoAs were the substrates of an active acyl-CoA thioesterase.⁵⁶,⁵⁷

The occurrence of stearoyl-CoA transacylase and acyl-CoA hydrolase activities in leek⁵⁸ was confirmed by Agrawal and Stumpf,⁶⁴ and it was shown that oleoyl-CoA was poorly hydrolysed and was the substrate of an acyl-CoA transacylase.

The most complete analysis of the question of the products of the elongase was carried out with etiolated leek seedling microsomes incubated with [1-¹⁴C]stearoyl-CoA.⁵⁹ Under conditions that also allow C₁₈-CoA elongation, radioactivity was observed only in the acyl-CoAs, PC and neutral lipids + free fatty acids; as no acyl acceptor (lyso-PC) was added to the reaction mixture, the nature of the reaction of acyl insertion from acyl-CoA into the PC was questioned. It was shown that the specific radioactivity of the acyl-CoA fraction remained constant throughout the experiment, thus ruling out the possibility of an acyl exchange between labeled acyl-CoA and unlabeled PC.⁵⁹

That very long chain acyl-CoAs were the products of the acyl-CoA elongase was demonstrated by the fact that, at the shortest time of incubation (5 min), all the label of the VLCFAs was restricted to the acyl-CoA fraction. No label was associated with the proteins, PC, or neutral lipids. This finding suggests that the VLCFAs are never covalently bound to the elongase. After their release, the very long chain acyl-CoAs are, as already evidenced in leek epidermis, inserted into PC and NL (or partly hydrolysed).

The very high level of elongation (34% in the acyl-CoAs after 60 min) allowed to show the progressive appearance of the very long chain acyl-CoAs (C₂₀-CoA after a 5 min lag, C₂₂-CoA after 10 min, C₂₄-CoA after 40 min), as well as the as yet unnoticed fact that only C₂₀ could be inserted into PC. In neutral lipids, the C₂₀ appeared after a lag of 20 min and the C₂₂ after 40 min. For these two reactions of acyl insertion into PC, or NL, C₁₈-CoA seems to be a better substrate than very long chain acyl-CoAs. The presence of very long chain acyl-CoAs *in vivo* was established after [1-¹⁴C]acetate incorporation by 7-day-old etiolated leek seedlings.⁶⁰ Most of the label of the acyl-CoA fraction was concentrated in C₁₆-CoA (54%), C₂₂-CoA (13%) and C₂₄-CoA (24%).⁶⁰,⁶¹

To what extent the endogenous ATP-dependent elongation follows an identical pathway is unknown. The nature of the substrate has not been elucidated but the products could be released as free fatty acids and neutral lipids (Lessire, unpublished data).

### C. The Reduction Steps

That the biosynthesis of VLCFAs requires the presence of reductants is no matter of debate: it has been shown repeatedly that NADH and NADPH allow the formation of VLCFA, whereas their omission from the reaction mixture leads invariably to the formation of 3-ketoacyl-CoA. However, neither the mechanism of the reduction, nor the nature of the reductant required for the two proposed reduction steps, have been definitely established. A variety of different responses have been observed, but, in numerous cases, NADPH is the ‘preferred’ reductant. Agrawal and Stumpf³⁹ have established that in a
cell-free extract from *Brassica juncea* developing seeds the oleoyl-CoA elongation to eicosenoyl-CoA accepts NADPH or NADH equally well, whereas the elongation of C₂₀:₁ to C₂₂:₁ exhibits a pronounced preference for NADPH. This result was taken as an indication of the presence of several elongases in *B. juncea*.³⁹ Similar observations and conclusions were made in the case of *Sinapis alba*.⁶²

However, in a study conducted in *Brassica napus* embryos, Taylor *et al.*⁴⁸ indicated a much greater tolerance for exogenously supplied NADH as a substitute reductant for [¹⁴C]22:1 biosynthesis.⁴⁸ Identical conclusions were drawn from a study on rapeseed, which indicated an additional slight preference for NADPH in terms of overall VLCFA formation (Lessire *et al.*, unpublished). NADPH seems to be the preferred reductant for the stearoyl-CoA elongation in the microsomes of developing seeds of meadowfoam,⁴⁷ while NADH has no effect.

In microsomes from leek epidermal cells, the acyl-CoA elongase relies on the provision of NADPH and, to a lesser extent, NADH. The omission of NADPH had marked effect on the overall fatty acid synthesis and on the accumulation of intermediates and seemed particularly important in the first reduction step.⁶³

No role could be assigned to NADH in the elongation pathway until recent evidence suggested that NADH could be used in the second reduction step of the elongation in developing rapeseed (Lessire, unpublished observations).

### D. Intermediates in the Elongation Mechanism

Acyl-CoAs emerge as quasi-universal substrates and products of the elongases and the mechanism of elongation has long been supposed to follow the sequence largely admitted in the case of the elongase from animal sources:

1. Condensation of malonyl-CoA with the substrate (long chain acyl-CoA) giving rise to the 3-ketoacyl-CoA higher homologue.
2. Reduction of the 3-ketoacyl-CoA to 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA.
3. Dehydration of the 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA to trans 2,3 enoyl-CoA.
4. Reduction of the trans 2,3 enoyl-CoA to the long chain acyl-CoA.

The reaction sequence has been actively investigated and the occurrence of the postulated intermediates has been demonstrated in the case of leaf and seed elongases:

1. In leek leaves, the occurrence of the 3-ketoacyl-CoA has been established in the absence of reductants and the kinetic parameters of the condensation reaction have been studied.⁵⁵
2. The 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydratase has also been investigated in leek.⁶³ The existence of this reaction and the presence of 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA have been demonstrated with synthetic substrates of the intermediate reactions. Interestingly, the activity of the 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydratase could be inhibited by adding antibodies raised against a purified hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydratase from rat liver, resulting in an accumulation of 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA and a related decrease of VLCFA-CoA: this observation establishes the involvement of the acyl-CoA dehydratase in the overall elongation pathway.⁶³ Though interesting, the fact that the antibody raised against hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydratase from rat liver recognizes the hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydratase from leek is puzzling, because the rat liver hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydratase seems to be of peroxisomal origin and does not seem to belong to an elongating complex.⁸⁷
3. The three metabolic intermediates expected to be formed during the synthesis of VLCFA have been identified using a particulate fraction from developing seeds of honesty.⁴⁵ 3-Ketoacyl-CoA, which is almost absent under standard conditions, accumulated when the reductants were omitted.⁴⁵

A kinetic study showed that the rate of formation of 3-ketoacyl-CoAs is similar to that of saturated VLCFA-CoAs. Hence, it was concluded that, in that case, as in animal

systems, the condensation could be the rate-limiting step.⁴⁵ In addition, during the purification of the acyl-CoA elongase from developing honesty seeds, Fehling *et al.* observed the synthesis of all the expected intermediates.⁶⁴

III. SOLUBILIZATION AND PURIFICATION OF PLANT ACYL-COA ELONGASES

The techniques used for the solubilization and purification of membrane enzymes have been applied and adapted to the case of the plant acyl-CoA elongases in leaves and, recently, in developing seeds. Most of the results obtained so far in this domain result from studies carried out with *Allium porrum*, *Lunaria annua*, *Sinapis alba*, *Limnanthes alba* and *Brassica napus*.

### A. Solubilization and Purification of Leek Elongases

Two distinct acyl-CoA elongases have been solubilized from leek epidermal cell microsomes⁵⁴,⁶⁵ and separated by sucrose density gradients. The elongase banding at 0.51 M-sucrose exhibited maximal activity with stearoyl-CoA as substrate, whereas that banding at 0.62 M-sucrose elongated chiefly C₂₀-CoA. By filtration on Sephacryl-S-300, the C₂₀-CoA and the C₁₈-CoA elongases had estimated apparent molecular masses in the presence of detergent of 600 and 350 kDa, respectively.⁶⁵ The estimated apparent *M*ᵣ, i.e. the molecular weight of the elongases in Triton-X-100 micelles, have to be considered very carefully, as the organization of the elongases in the micelles is unknown. The solubilized acyl-CoA elongases were further purified by a two-step procedure including a DEAE-column and an ultrogel column.⁶⁶,⁶⁷ This procedure yielded only one acyl-CoA elongase (apparent *M*ᵣ ≈ ca. 300 kDa), which, after boiling in the presence of SDS, could be resolved into three major protein bands of 59, 61 and 65 kDa. The partially purified elongase was highly delipidated (about 10 mol lipid/mol of 59–65 kDa protein). The remaining lipids were PS and PE.

Polyclonal antibodies have been raised against the acyl-CoA elongase purified from leek epidermal cells. An immune complex is precipitable with Protein A-Sepharose. One percent of the proteins were immunoprecipitated and the immunoprecipitate contained an elongating activity which was 86 times higher than that of the unbound fraction.⁶⁸ These antibodies recognized the different bands constitutive of the purified elongase, whereas an antibody raised against the purified 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydratase from rat liver recognized only the 65 kDa band.⁶³

The activity of the elongase was strongly stimulated by the addition of exogenous phospholipids.⁶⁶,⁶⁷ As already mentioned, the purified elongase had no marked specificity towards acyl-CoAs and elongated stearoyl-CoA and oleoyl-CoA, as well as other long-chain fatty acids (see also substrate section). The products and the intermediates are always observed as CoA-thioesters. Since there is no acyl-CoA synthetase activity associated with the purified acyl-CoA elongase, this finding confirms the previous suggestion that the acyl-CoAs are not covalently bound to the proteins.

### B. Solubilization and Purification of Acyl-CoA Elongases from Developing Seeds

The techniques and methods developed for the solubilization and partial purification of the leek elongases have proven useful in the case of the acyl-CoA elongases from developing seeds. Murphy and Mukherjee⁶² have solubilized the elongase from 15,000 g particulate fractions of developing seeds of *Sinapis alba* and *Lunaria annua*, by using Triton X-100, or octylthioglucoside, the latter being less effective in the solubilization of the activity. After solubilization, the elongases from *Lunaria annua* synthesized exclusively eicosenoic acid from oleic acid⁶² (though the untreated control formed substantial amounts of erucic acid and nervonic acids) a situation highly similar to that already observed for the elongases from leek epidermal cells.⁶⁵ A partial purification of the solubilized elongase from *Lunaria annua* was achieved by a three-step procedure (PEG

treatment, DEAE chromatography and ultrogel filtration). This procedure resulted in a 30-fold purification of the condensing enzyme.⁶⁴ Using the protocol developed for leek elongases and successfully used in the case of honesty, Lardans and Trémolières were able to solubilize and partly purify the elongase detected in the microsomes from meadowfoam with Triton X-100.⁴⁷ The apparent molecular weight in Triton X-100 micelles was above 300 kDa, very close to that reported for the acyl-CoA elongase in leek epidermal microsomes.

New methods are also investigated: using a detergent to protein ratio of 2.5, Créach and Lessire have solubilized the acyl-CoA elongase from developing rapeseed. The oleoyl-CoA was partially purified after affinity-column chromatography, which retained the acyl-CoA-binding proteins, the rest of the protocol developed in leek being unmodified (DEAE chromatography and gel filtration; Créach and Lessire, unpublished results).

### C. Organization of the Acyl-CoA Elongases

The results reported in leek, and other systems have shown that

(i) Acyl-CoA elongases are multi-enzyme membrane complexes. Since drastic conditions are required to dissociate the different components of the elongase(s), it is concluded that the interactions between the proteins are strong, and the multi-enzyme complex is stable under physiological conditions.

(ii) There is a basic common organization of the two elongating complexes, since, after purification of the two solubilized elongases, only one acyl-CoA elongase is purified, exhibiting a broad substrate specificity.

A tentative model of the organization and functioning of the leek acyl-CoA elongase has been presented⁶⁶ and is summarized in Fig. 1.

(a) There are different enzymes catalysing the four reactions postulated in the elongation sequence.

(b) The substrates are not covalently bound to the elongases, so no long chain acyl-CoA (or malonyl-CoA) transacylase is required for the correct binding to the condensing site.

(c) The long-chain acyl-CoAs partition between the membrane and the aqueous phase. The membrane-bound acyl-CoAs are substrates of the condensing enzyme.

(d) The membrane long-chain acyl-CoAs interact with the elongase at the acyl-CoA site by partly ionic and partly hydrophobic interactions, whereas hydrosoluble malonyl-CoA should predictably interact only by ionic interactions at the malonyl-CoA site through their CoA end and their free carboxyl group end.

(e) During the condensation, the CoA moiety of the acyl-CoA is lost. The first three carbons and the CoA moiety of the neosynthesized 3-ketoacyl-CoA have a malonyl CoA-like structure and are in the polar domain of the condensing enzyme.

(f) After condensation, the 3-ketoacyl-CoA is attached to the enzyme(s) at the malonyl-CoA site through its malonyl-CoA-like part, and by hydrophobic interactions of its aliphatic chain to the apolar domain of the enzyme.

(g) As the reaction progresses, the elongating chain loses its malonyl-CoA-like structure, the interaction with the malonyl-CoA site is weakened and the long-chain acyl-CoA interacts again with the acyl-CoA site of either the reductase II, or of the condensing enzyme of the next elongase.

(h) The three intermediates are also attached to the enzymes of the elongases by partly ionic, partly hydrophobic non-covalent interactions.

### D. Modulation of the Activity by the Membranes

Acyl-CoA elongases are membrane-bound enzymes using amphiphilic substrates (long chain acyl-CoAs). Any attempt to interpret the activity of these enzymes should take these

Biosynthesis of VLCFAs

| P | CoA sites for |
| --- | --- |
| O | Malonyl-CoA like |
| L | Acyl-CoA like |
| A |  |
| R |  |
| D |  |
| O |  |
| M |  |
| A |  |
| I |  |
| N |  |

FIG. 1. Acyl-CoA elongases: postulated scheme of elongation. For details see text.

characteristics into account. ${ }^{69,70}$ A kinetic model has been developed and applied to the case of elongases. ${ }^{71}$ It has been demonstrated that:

(1) The acyl-CoA elongases use the membrane-bound acyl-CoAs. ${ }^{71}$

(2) The concentration of long chain acyl-CoAs ($S_{\mathrm{m}}$) within the membranes is several hundred times higher than that present in the aqueous phase ($S_{\mathrm{aq}}$). This may help to understand the decreased activity for a given total acyl-CoA concentration when the enzyme is solubilized: in the absence of a bilayer structure, the apparent $K_{\mathrm{m}}$ will be strongly increased. In good agreement, the value of the $K_{\mathrm{m}}$ for the purified enzyme is higher than $100 \mu \mathrm{M}$. The insertion into a phospholipid bilayer results in the increase of the actual acyl-CoA concentration in the vicinity of the enzyme and in the significant decrease of the apparent $K_{\mathrm{m}}$ by about two orders of magnitude: under these conditions the apparent $K_{\mathrm{m}}$ (1.7 $\mu \mathrm{M}$) is quite similar to that observed for the microsomal native enzyme. ${ }^{67}$ An interesting development of this mathematical analysis is the suggestion that the poor activity of the purified, delipidated enzyme may reflect the low concentration of the substrate ($S_{\mathrm{aq}}$) compared to $S_{\mathrm{m}}$ rather than a denaturation of the elongase. Conversely when the purified elongase is incorporated into lipid vesicles, the observed increase of the specific activity could be due to the decrease of the apparent $K_{\mathrm{m}}$ induced by a change of the enzyme environment and not necessarily to an increase of the catalytic constant ('renaturation').

(3) As observed for many enzymes employing acyl-CoAs, the curve of the activity of the elongase as a function of the acyl-CoA concentration is sigmoidal. The mathematical analysis and the resulting model allowed interpretation of the different shapes of the curves expressing the enzyme activity vs. the substrate concentration. ${ }^{71}$ For example, an explanation is provided for the transformation of the sigmoid curve of elongating activity observed when the elongase was measured in native microsomes (i.e. when the membrane-bound acyl-CoAs were also the substrates of acyl-CoA thioesterases and acyl-CoA transacylase), to a hyperbolic curve when purified elongase was included in phospholipid vesicles, i.e. when no other enzymes using acyl-CoA were present in the membrane. ${ }^{71}$

(4) These considerations do not apply to the case of soluble malonyl-CoA. Accordingly, the apparent $K_{\mathrm{m}}$ for malonyl-CoA seems to be constant whatever the environmental conditions of the acyl-CoA elongase. ${ }^{71}$

IV. LOCALIZATION OF THE ELONGASES

A. Localization of the Leaf Elongases

In good agreement with an involvement of VLCFA in wax biosynthesis, acetate incorporation into VLCFA and alkanes was shown to occur in isolated peeled epidermis of *Senecio odoris*, *Pisum sativum* and leek (for review see Ref. 5); some VLCFA formation was also observed in the mesophyll tissue of leek.

The exact location of the elongases in the membranes has been investigated in very few cases; it is generally assigned to the so-called 'microsomes' which are a complex mixture of vesicles originating from the endomembrane system (ER, endoplasmic reticulum; GA, Golgi apparatus; PM, plasma membrane, tonoplast, transition vesicles) and from plastids (or mitochondria). By subfractionation of the crude microsomal pellet, it was shown in leek epidermis¹⁶ and in maize coleoptiles,¹⁹ that elongation of stearoyl-CoA takes place chiefly in an ER-enriched fraction and that almost no elongation occurs in the PM-enriched fraction whereas most of the VLCFAs were accumulated in the PM. A further membrane purification was achieved with etiolated 7-day-old leek seedlings yielding ER, GA and lipid-rich vesicles (LRVs) and, finally, after purification in an aqueous two-polymer phase system, the PM was also purified.⁷²⁻⁷⁴

Three elongating activities were demonstrated.⁷³,⁷⁴ The C₁₈-CoA elongase was chiefly (64%) associated with the ER, and to a lesser extent with the GA (25%), whereas the C₂₀-CoA elongase was found in GA (63%) and ER (23%). ATP-dependent elongation of endogenous substrates was observed in heavy, unidentified membranes (1.16–1.18 g cm⁻³) different from the plasma membrane. LRVs did not elongate the various substrates.

Interestingly, PM was also devoid of elongating activity, so that, unless the PM contains elongases which are specifically inhibited during purification, its inability to synthesize VLCFAs combined with the accumulation of these molecules in this membrane, makes it likely that they are synthesized in the endomembranes (ER and GA) and transferred to the PM.

The ATP-dependent elongation seems to be more or less confined to an as yet undetermined membrane fraction that bands at 1.16–1.18 g cm⁻³, like the crude PM. The fact that there are at least three different elongases clearly distinguished not only by their substrates, but also by their intracellular localization does not give any clue as to their organization. Nor does it imply that they are greatly different: for example, it has been suggested that the GA-located C₂₀-CoA elongase could be a ‘dimer’ of the ER-located C₁₈-CoA elongase, in close agreement with the apparent molecular weights observed after gel filtration of the solubilized elongases.⁶⁵

B. Localization of the Acyl-CoA Elongases in Developing Seeds

The analysis of the localization of the acyl-CoA elongases in developing seeds has been complicated by the extreme difficulty encountered in obtaining well-defined fractions reasonably free of contaminants.

1. Limnanthes alba

The major fatty acids synthesized in meadowfoam seeds are the most unusual 20:1Δ5 (69% of total fatty acids) and 22:2Δ5,13 (16%). They originate from 20:0 and 22:1Δ13 respectively: thus *L. alba* appears to be a very interesting material for the study of the elongation of 18:0 and 18:1Δ9 in the same developing seed.⁹ Lardans and Trémolières obtained indications that the elongation of saturated acyl-CoAs occurs in the 100,000 g pellet, whereas in the 15,000 g fraction, the elongation is most effective with oleoyl-CoA.⁴⁷

2. Erucic Acid-Forming Seeds

Erucic acid formation is associated primarily with the seeds of the genus *Brassica*, genus *Sinapis*, *Crambe abyssinica*, *Tropaeolum majus* and *Lunaria annua*. In all cases, the

synthesis has been assigned to the membranes and demonstrated in various membrane subfractions, such as the 2000 g pellet, the 15,000 g pellet and the microsomal pellet.³⁹,⁶²,⁷⁵ The pelleting of elongase(s) at relatively low speeds suggested that these enzymes could be bound to organelles rather than to microsomal membranes.

That this location could be artifactual was recently suggested by the elegant experiments carried out by Whitfield *et al.*⁷⁶ Having subjected homogenates of developing seeds from *Lunaria annua* and *Brassica napus* to sucrose density gradients, these authors presented convincing evidence that an elongase banding normally with ER was shifted to higher density-membranes only when 5 mM-EDTA was omitted, i.e. when an aggregation of membranes probably caused by divalent cations could occur. Another elongase-containing membrane fraction, which awaits further examination, was also detected.⁷⁶

In Jojoba, the activity seems to be entirely associated with the floating wax pad after centrifugation at 12,000 g but this result does not preclude that enzymes of internal wax formation be located within microsomes.⁴³

### C. How the VLCFAs Reach the Plasma Membrane: Lipid Transfer

The occurrence of an *in vivo* VLCFA vesicular transfer was demonstrated for the first time in etiolated leek seedlings pulse-labeled with [1-¹⁴C]acetate and chased for different times. The microsomes were subfractionated into ER, GA, PM and LRVs. During the chase, the VLCFAs were quantitatively transferred from LRVs to heavier membranes. The kinetics were compatible with a vesicular transfer.⁷² As a function of the chase-time, the maximal VLCFA label was observed successively in the ER (5 min), in LRVs (15 min), GA (30 min) and PM (60 min).⁷⁴ For 60 min the increase of the label of the VLCFAs in the PM is accounted for by the decrease in the ER and to a lesser extent GA.⁷⁴ The intermediate role of the LRVs in VLCFA transfer is well illustrated by the huge and transient increase of their labeled-VLCFA content.⁷⁴ Moreover, the almost complete absence of elongation ability in the LRVs indicates that the transfer of VLCFA is dissociated from their synthesis. Purified plasma membrane exhibited a convincing accumulation of VLCFAs during the chase.⁷³,⁷⁴ The role of the GA in VLCFA delivery to the PM was established in acetate-labeled leek seedlings treated with monensin, a perturbant of membrane traffic. Monensin led to a dose-dependent redistribution of the acetate-labeled lipids within the membrane fractions.⁷⁸ The accumulation of the labeled lipids within the GA was associated with a deficit of the same lipids in LRVs and PM, indicating a monensin-induced block of the lipid transfer at the Golgi level. The label deficit at the PM level is for more than two-thirds accounted for by a lack of VLCFA transfer.⁷⁹ All these data support the proposal of a vesicle-mediated ER–GA–PM transfer of VLCFA. Very similar conclusions may be drawn from the preliminary examination of the effect of temperature on VLCFA transfer to the PM.⁸⁰,⁸¹ Below, or at 12°C, C₂₀–C₂₄ lipids seem to be accumulated in the ER and GA, with very little being transferred to the PM; above 12°C and up to 24°C, the C₂₀-C₂₄ lipids are transferred to the PM. Taken together, all the experiments concerning the localization of the elongases, the fate of the very long chain acyl-CoAs and, finally, the *in vivo* intermembrane transfer of the VLCFAs, allow the first clear understanding of the intracellular journey of the VLCFAs. The main events so far demonstrated are shown in Fig. 2.

However, many important questions have been opened to investigation:

(1) The PM is devoid of any elongating activity. Whether this is due to its absence from this membrane, as suggested earlier, or to the artifactual inactivation of an as yet undetected elongase remains to be elucidated. The immunolocalization could provide an answer to this question. With this aim in mind, antibodies have been raised against acyl-CoA elongases and have already been shown to specifically immunoprecipitate the elongases of the microsomes from leek seedlings.⁶⁸

C. CASSAGNE et al.

| Membrane fraction | Main event(s) |
|-------------------|---------------|
| ER               | C18 → C18 CoA → C18<br>C20 CoA → VLC-PL<br>C22 CoA, C24CoA<br>Vesicular transfer to GA |
| LRVs             |              |
| GA               | C20 CoA → VLC-PL<br>C22 … C26 CoA<br>Vesicular transfer to PM |
| LRVs             | C20 - C26 CoAs, VLC-PL<br>9? Wax biosynthesis |
| PM               |              |

FIG. 2. Intracellular synthesis and transfer of VLCFA. In the scheme, the steps 1–8 have been demonstrated. The chemical form of the products, the location of the elongase, the transfer of VLCFA have been evidenced. The presence of very long chain acyl-CoAs in PM, their involvement in wax biosynthesis (step 9), the extent to which VLCFA are transferred to GA and PM as acyl-CoAs and/or PL remain to be answered.

(2) As seen in the preceding sections, the question of the form under which the VLCFAs are transferred is unanswered, but whatever the answer(s), it will have to take into account the following observations:

(a) Whatever the time of incubation (except for the shortest ones) VLCFAs are distributed among acyl-CoAs, phospholipids and neutral lipids; this is true *in vivo* and *in vitro*.

(b) After various periods of pulse, the VLCFA label remains constant in the microsomes during the chase, and increases in the PM (transfer to the PM). After a 120 min chase, 31.5% of the total VLCFA label of the microsomes is recovered in the purified PM. According to the PM marker distribution, about 30% of the PM is recovered in the purified fraction. These data suggest that, after 2-hr chase, the neosynthesized VLCFAs are almost integrally transferred to the PM, via the GA. A reasonable hypothesis from these two series of observations is that VLCFAs are transferred as acyl-CoAs and PL to the PM.

(3) How are the VLCFAs arriving at the PM and destined to the wax layer sorted from the VLCFAs destined to be PM-resident?

(4) How are the VLCFA-derived wax components synthesized and in which cellular compartments? VLCFA reduction and their esterification to fatty alcohols have been shown to take place from acyl-CoAs within the microsomes, but no further identification of the sites of synthesis has so far been achieved. It has been hypothesized that some wax formation could take place within the PM. This hypothesis fits clearly with the general scheme presented in this review and will be the field of active investigations because of its basic and applied developments.

(5) How are the wax components, whatever the site of their formation (possibly PM) excreted to the external parts of the leaves to form the epicuticular wax layer?

do the underlying (epidermal) cells modify the wax composition? And to what extent does the wax movement into and out of the epidermal cells, as observed in leek epidermis,^{84} play a role in the above question?

V. CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES

The organization of the acyl-CoA elongases within membranes, the mechanism of the various reactions occurring during the elongation sequence are virtually unknown. The chemical synthesis of intermediates and of specific inhibitors will help to study further the different steps of the overall reaction and their stereochemistry. Special attention should be paid to the case of the condensing enzyme. Its substrates and products are clearly not covalently bound to the enzyme, but whether there is a transient covalently bound intermediate during this crucial step has not been investigated. Interestingly, cerulenin was shown recently to inhibit specifically and quantitatively the condensing enzyme of the leek acyl-CoA elongase, although no indication of a covalent binding of the drug to the enzyme could be obtained.^{85}

Besides a better understanding of the biochemistry of the acyl-CoA elongases, the progress in the knowledge of these enzymes in the past decade has opened the way to the as yet unattainable areas, of cloning and sequencing the genes of these membrane-bound multienzyme complexes, with the aim of manipulating the leaf wax composition and the fatty acid composition of seed triacylglycerols. Many approaches are already at hand:

(1) Antibodies raised against these proteins could be used for the screening of an expression library. The difficulties of this approach should, however, not be overlooked: recently this method allowed unexpectedly the isolation of a cDNA coding for a Dna J protein.^{86}

(2) The N-terminal sequence of the subunits purified from acyl-CoA elongases by SDS–PAGE electrophoresis may be determined, particularly in the case of the 65 kDa hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydratase recently demonstrated in leeks.^{63} Degenerated oligonucleotides derived from the sequence should be used to screen a cDNA library, or used primers in PCR experiments.

(3) Advantage could be taken of the existence of high and low erucic acid cultivars of rapeseed, assuming—although far from certain, and in no way established—that the differences are related to different levels of transcripts: cDNAs could be isolated by differential screening.

(4) Mutants of *Arabidopsis thaliana* having a low VLCFA content have been obtained.^{88} Because of the small size of its genome, it is possible to use this plant to isolate target genes by chromosome walking, as recently shown in the case of a gene coding for a w3 desaturase;^{89} alternatively, a mutant *Arabidopsis* might be isolated from a collection of Ti tagged mutants, in order to clone the gene(s) as in the case of a gene coding for a Δ12 desaturase.^{90}

All these—and other—approaches should contribute in the near future to an unprecedented improvement in our knowledge of the organization and functioning of the elongases and allow control of their activities in higher plants.

Acknowledgements—The helpful critical reading of the manuscript by Dr A. Heape is gratefully acknowledged. The work of the authors presented in this paper was supported by CNRS Université de Bordeaux II and CETIOM ONIDOL. Part of the study was conducted under the BIOAVENIR programme/groupe de recherches ‘Barrières Cuticulaires’ financed by Rhône-Poulenc, with the contribution of the ‘Ministère de la Recherche et de l’Espace’ and the ‘Ministère de l’Industrie et du Commerce Extérieur’.

REFERENCES

1. DOWNING, D. T. In Chemistry and Biochemistry of Natural Waxes, pp. 17–48 (KOLATTUKUDY, P. E., ed.) Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1976.
2. SARGENT, J. R. In Chemistry and Biochemistry of Natural Waxes, pp. 49–91 (KOLATTUKUDY, P. E., ed.) Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1976.

3. JACKSON, L. L. and BLOMQUIST, G. J. In Chemistry and Biochemistry of Natural Waxes, pp. 201–233 (KOLATTUKUDY, P. E., ed.) Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1976.

4. TULLOCH, A. P. In Chemistry and Biochemistry of Natural Waxes, pp. 235–287 (KOLATTUKUDY, P. E., ed.) Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1976.

5. KOLATTUKUDY, P. E., CROTEAU, R. and BUCKNER, J. S. In Chemistry and Biochemistry of Natural Waxes, pp. 2289–2347 (KOLATTUKUDY, P. E., ed.) Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1976.

6. DOWNEY, R. K. and CRAIG, B. M. J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc. 41, 475–478 (1964).

7. YERMANOS, D. M. J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc. 52, 115–120 (1975).

8. LARDANS, A. and TREMOLIERES, A. Phytochemistry 30, 3955–3961 (1991).

9. HITCHCOCK, C. and NICHOLS, B. W. Plant Lipid Biochemistry, pp. 1–44. Academic Press, London, 1971.

10. HARWOOD, J. In The Biochemistry of Plants, pp. 1–55 (STUMPF, P. K. and CONN, E. E., eds.) Academic Press, New York, 1980.

11. APPLEQUIST, L. A. Hereditas 61, 9–44 (1969).

12. MUKHERJEE, K. D. and KIEWITT, I. Planta 149, 461–463 (1980).

13. MUKHERJEE, K. D. Lipids 21, 347–352 (1986).

14. BATTEY, J. F., SCHMIDT, K. M. and OHLROGGE, J. B. Trends Biotechnol. 5, 122–126 (1989).

15. MURPHY, D. J. Trends Biotechnol. 10, 84–87 (1992).

16. CASSAGNE, C. and LESSIRE, R. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 191, 146–152 (1978).

17. LESSIRE, R., ABDUL-KARIM, T. and CASSAGNE, C. In The Plant Cuticle, pp. 167–179 (CUTLER, D. F., ALVIN, K. L. and PRICE, C. E., eds) Academic Press, London, 1982.

18. MOREAU, P., JUGUELIN, H., LESSIRE, R. and CASSAGNE, C. In Separations using Aqueous Phase Systems, pp. 51–58 (FISHER, D. and SUTHERLAND, I. A., eds) Plenum Press, New York, 1989.

19. LESSIRE, R., HARTMANN-BOUILLON, M. A. and CASSAGNE, C. Phytochemistry 21, 55–59 (1982).

20. BLANCHARDIE, P., CARDE, J. P. and CASSAGNE, C. Biol. Cell. 30, 127–136 (1977).

21. NORTON, W. T. and CAMMER, W. In Myelin, pp. 147–195 (MORELL, P., ed.) Plenum Press, New York, 1984.

22. BOURRE, J. M. In Neurological Mutations Affecting Myelination, pp. 187–206 (BAUMANN, N., ed.) Elsevier, North Holland, Amsterdam, 1980.

23. HEAPE, A., BOIRON, F. and CASSAGNE, C. Neurochem. Pathol. 7, 157–167 (1987).

24. BOIRON, F., DARRIET, D., BOURRE, J. M. and CASSAGNE, C. Neurochem. Int. 6, 109–116 (1984).

25. CASSAGNE, C., DARRIET, D. and BOURRE, J. M. FEBS Lett. 90, 336–340 (1978).

26. BERNERT, J. T. and SPRECHER, H. J. Biol. Chem. 254(22), 11584–11590 (1979).

27. TAKESHITA, M., YOSHIDA, S. and YUBISUI, T. Neurochem. Int. 15(4), 497–502 (1989).

28. OSEI, P., SUNEJA, S. K., LAGUNA, J. C., NAGI, M. N., COOK, L., PRASAD, M. R. and CINTI, D. L. J. Biol. Chem. 264(12), 6844–6849 (1989).

29. HARWOOD, J. L. Ann. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol. 39, 101–138 (1988).

30. KOLATTUKUDY, P. E. In The Biochemistry of Plants, pp. 571–645 (STUMPF, P. K. and CONN, E. E., eds) Academic Press, New York, 1980.

31. WETTSTEIN-KNOWLES, P. VON In Waxes (HAMILTON, R. J., ed.) Oily Press, Alloway, Ayr (in press).

32. CASSAGNE, C., LESSIRE, R., BESSOULE, J. J. and MOREAU, P. In Metabolism, Structure, and Function of Plant Lipids, pp. 481–488 (STUMPF, P. K., MUDD, J. B. and NES, W. D., eds) Plenum Press, New York, 1987.

33. HAWKE, J. C. and STUMPF, P. K. Plant Physiol. 40, 1023–1032 (1965).

34. LESSIRE, R. PhD. Thesis, Bordeaux, 1981.

35. WALKER, K. A. and HARWOOD, J. L. Biochem. J. 237, 41–46 (1986).

36. WETTSTEIN-KNOWLES, P. VON FEBS Lett. 42, 187–191 (1974).

37. WETTSTEIN-KNOWLES, P. VON In Metabolism, Structure, and Function of Plant Lipids, pp. 489–498 (STUMPF, P. K., MUDD, J. B. and NES, W. D., eds) Plenum Press, New York, 1987.

38. MACEY, M. J. K. and STUMPF, P. K. Plant Physiol. 43, 1637–1647 (1968).

39. AGRAWAL, V. P. and STUMPF, P. K. Lipids 20, 361–366 (1985).

40. BOLTON, P. and HARWOOD, J. L. Biochem. J. 168, 261–269 (1977).

41. SANCHEZ, J. and HARWOOD, J. L. Biochem. J. 199, 221–226 (1981).

42. SANCHEZ, J., KHOR, H. T. and HARWOOD, J. L. Phytochemistry 22, 849–854 (1983).

43. POLLARD, M. R., MCKEON, T., GUPTA, L. M. and STUMPF, P. K. Lipids, 14, 651–662 (1979).

44. STUMPF, P. K. In The Biochemistry of Plants, pp. 177–204 (STUMPF, P. K. and CONN, E. E., eds) Academic Press, New York, 1980.

45. FEHLING, E. and MUKHERJEE, K. D. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1082, 239–247 (1991).

46. POLLARD, M. R. and STUMPF, P. K. Plant Physiol. 66, 649–655 (1980).

47. LARDANS, A. and TREMOLIERES, A. Phytochemistry 31, 121–127 (1992).

48. TAYLOR, D. M., BARTON, D. L., RIoux, K. P., MCKENZIE, S. L., REED, D. W., UNDERHILL, E. W., POMEROY, M. K. and WEBER, N. Plant Physiol. 99, 1609–1618 (1992).

49. CREACH, A., LESSIRE, R. and CASSAGNE, C. In Metabolism, Structure and Utilization of Plant Lipids, pp. 428–431 (CHERIF, A., MILED-DALOUD, D. B., MARZOUK, B., SMAOUI, A. and ZARROUK, M., eds) Centre National Pédagogique, Tunis, 1992.

50. LESSIRE, R. and CASAGNE, C. Plant Sci. Lett. 16, 31–39 (1979).

51. LESSIRE, R. and CASSAGNE, C. Plant Sci. Lett. 14, 43–48 (1979).

52. AGRAWAL, V. P., LESSIRE, R. and STUMPF, P. K. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 230, 580–589 (1984).

53. LESSIRE, R., JUGUELIN, H., MOREAU, P. and CASSAGNE, C. Phytochemistry 24, 1187–1192 (1985).

54. AGRAWAL, V. P. and STUMPF, P. K. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 240, 154–165 (1985).

55. LESSIRE, R., BESSOULE, J. J. and CASSAGNE, C. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1006, 35–40 (1989).

56. ABDUL-KARIM, T., LESSIRE, R. and CASSAGNE, C. Physiol. Vég. 20, 679–689 (1982).

57. CASSAGNE, C. and LESSIRE, R. In Biochemistry and Metabolism of Plant Lipids, pp. 79–82 (WINTERMANS, J. F. G. M. and KUIPER, P. J. C., eds) Elsevier Biomedical Press, Amsterdam, 1982.

58. ABDUL-KARIM, T., LESSIRE, R. and CASSAGNE, C. Plant Sci. Lett. 25, 161–173 (1982).

59. LESSIRE, R., JUGUELIN, H., MOREAU, P. and CASSAGNE, C. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 239, 260–269 (1985).

60. MOREAU, P., JUGUELIN, H., LESSIRE, R. and CASSAGNE, C. Phytochemistry 23, 67–71 (1984).

61. MOREAU, P., LESSIRE, R., JUGUELIN, H. and CASSAGNE, C. In Structure, Function and Metabolism of Plant Lipids, pp. 25–28 (SIEGENTHALER, P. A. and EICHENGERGER, W., eds) Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1984.

62. MURPHY, D. J. and MUKHERJEE, K. D. Z. Naturforsch. 44, 629–634 (1989).

63. LESSIRE, R., BESSOULE, J. J., COOK, L., CINTI, D. L. and CASSAGNE, C. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1169, 243–249 (1993).

64. FEHLING, E., LESSIRE, R., CASSAGNE, C. and MUKHERJEE, K. D. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1126, 88–94 (1992).

65. LESSIRE, R., BESSOULE, J. J. and CASSAGNE, C. FEBS Lett. 187, 314–320 (1985).

66. BESSOULE, J. J. PhD Thesis, Bordeaux, 1989.

67. BESSOULE, J. J., LESSIRE, R. and CASSAGNE, C. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 268, 475–484 (1989).

68. BESSOULE, J. J., CREACH, A., LESSIRE, R. and CASSAGNE, C. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1117, 78–82 (1992).

69. BROCKMAN, H. L. J. Biol. Chem. 250(12), 4423–4426 (1975).

70. JUGUELIN, H., BESSOULE, J. J. and CASSAGNE, C. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1068, 41–51 (1991).

71. BESSOULE, J. J., LESSIRE, R. and CASSAGNE, C. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 983, 35–41 (1991).

72. MOREAU, P., JUGUELIN, H., LESSIRE, R. and CASSAGNE, C. Phytochemistry 25, 387–391 (1986).

73. MOREAU, P., JUGUELIN, H., LESSIRE, R. and CASSAGNE, C. Phytochemistry 27, 1631–1638 (1988).

74. MOREAU, P., BERTHO, P., JUGUELIN, H. and LESSIRE, R. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 26, 173–178 (1988).

75. MURPHY, D. J. and MUKHERJEE, K. D. FEBS Lett. 230, 101–104 (1988).

76. WHITFIELD, H. V., MURPHY, D. J. and HILLS, M. J. Phytochemistry 32, 255–258 (1993).

77. MOREAU, P., BERTHO, P. and CASSAGNE, C. NATO ASI series, Vol 40 In Dynamics and Biogenesis of Membranes, pp. 77–83 (OP DEN KAMP, J. A. F., ed.) Springer, Berlin, 1990.

78. BERTHO, P., MOREAU, P., JUGUELIN, H., GAUTIER, M. and CASSAGNE, C. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 978, 91–96 (1989).

79. BERTHO, P., MOREAU, P., MORRE, D. J. and CASSAGNE, C. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1070, 127–134 (1991).

80. MOREAU, P., STURBOIS, B., MANETA-PEYRET, L., MORRE, D. J. and CASSAGNE, C. In Molecular Mechanisms of Membrane Traffic (MORRE, D. J., HOWELL, K. E. and BERGERON, J. I. M., eds) Springer, Berlin, 1993.

81. CASSAGNE, C., MOREAU, P., STURBOIS, B., SCHNEIDER, F., MANETA-PEYRET, L., COMPERE, P., BESSOULE, J. J., MORRE, D. J. and LESSIRE, R. In Metabolism Structure and Utilization of Plant Lipids, pp. 459–468 (CHERIF, A., BEN-MILED-DAOUD, D., MARZOUK, B., SMAOUI, A. and ZARROUK, M., eds) Centre National Pédagogique, Tunis, 1992.

82. KOLATTUKUDY, P. E. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 142(2), 701–709 (1971).

83. WETTSTEIN-KNOWLES, P. VON Physiol. Vég. 20, 787–809 (1982).

84. CASSAGNE, C. and LESSIRE, R. Plant Sci. Lett. 5, 261–268 (1975).

85. SCHNEIDER, F., LESSIRE, R., BESSOULE, J. J., JUGUELIN, H. and CASSAGNE, C. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1152, 243–252 (1993).

86. BESSOULE, J. J. FEBS Lett. 323, 51–54 (1993).

87. COOK, L., NAGI, M. N., SUNEJA, S. K., HAND, A. R. and CINTI, D. L. Biochem. J. 286, 91–100 (1992).

88. KUNST, L., TAYLOR, D. C. and UNDERHILL, E. W. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 30(4), 425–434 (1992).

89. ARONDEL, V., LEMIEUX, B., HWANG, I., GIBSON, S., GOODMAN, H. M. and SOMERVILLE, C. R. Science 258, 1353–1355 (1992).

90. BROWSE, J., MCCONN, M., DOUGLAS, J. JR and MIQUEL, M. J. Biol. Chem. 268, 16345–16351 (1993).
