
JOURNAL OF BACTERIOLOGY, Nov. 1993, p. 6890–6901
0021-9193/93/216890-12$02.00/0
Copyright © 1993, American Society for Microbiology

**Metabolism of Dibenzothiophene and Naphthalene in Pseudomonas Strains: Complete DNA Sequence of an Upper Naphthalene Catabolic Pathway**

SYLVIA A. DENOME,$^{1}$ DANIEL C. STANLEY,$^{2}$ EDWIN S. OLSON,$^{2}$ AND KEVIN D. YOUNG$^{1*}$

Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of North Dakota School of Medicine,$^{1}$ and Energy and Environmental Research Center, University of North Dakota,$^{2}$ Grand Forks, North Dakota 58202

Received 19 March 1993/Accepted 13 August 1993

From a soil isolate, *Pseudomonas* strain C18, we cloned and sequenced a 9.8-kb DNA fragment that encodes dibenzothiophene-degrading enzymes. Nine open reading frames were identified and designated *doxABDEF-GHIJ*. Collectively, we refer to these genes as the DOX pathway. At the nucleotide level, *doxABD* are identical to the *ndoABC* genes that encode naphthalene dioxygenase of *Pseudomonas putida*. The DoxG protein is 97% identical to NahC (1,2-dihydroxynaphthalene dioxygenase) of *P. putida*. DoxE has 37% identity with cis-toluene dihydrodiol dehydrogenase. DoxF is similar to the aldehyde dehydrogenases of many organisms. The predicted DoxHIJ proteins have no obvious sequence similarities to known proteins. Gas chromatography with a flame ionization detector and mass spectroscopy confirmed that the DOX proteins convert naphthalene to salicylate and convert phenanthrene to 1-hydroxy-2-naphthoic acid. *doxI* mutants convert naphthalene to trans-o-hydroxybenzylidenepyruvate, indicating that the DoxI protein is similar to NahE (trans-o-hydroxybenzylidenepyruvate hydratase-aldolase). Comparison of the DOX sequence with restriction maps of cloned naphthalene catabolic pathway (NAH) genes revealed many conserved restriction sites. The DOX gene arrangement is identical to that proposed for NAH, except that the NAH equivalent of *doxH* has not been recognized. DoxH may be involved in the conversion of 2-hydroxy-4-(2′-oxo-3,5-cyclohexadienyl)-buta-2,4-dienoate to cis-o-hydroxybenzylidenepyruvate. *doxJ* encodes an enzyme similar to NahD (isomerase). Our findings indicate that a single genetic pathway controls the metabolism of dibenzothiophene, naphthalene, and phenanthrene in strain C18 and that the DOX sequence encodes a complete upper naphthalene catabolic pathway similar to NAH.

The biochemical pathway for the metabolism of dibenzothiophene (DBT) in *Pseudomonas* strains has been described by Kodama et al. (32) and results in the degradation of one of the aromatic rings of DBT to yield 3-hydroxy-2-formyl-benzothiophene. This pathway for DBT metabolism has biochemical similarities to the oxidative metabolic pathways of naphthalene (10), phenanthrene (13), and anthracene (13). Some DBT-degradative genes have been shown to have DNA homology with naphthalene-degradative plasmids (16), but the sequence of the gene(s) encoding DBT metabolism has not been previously determined.

Soil isolate C18 (a *Pseudomonas* sp.) was identified as a DBT-metabolizing organism on the basis of its ability to produce a UV-fluorescent compound from DBT (34). We isolated a 9.8-kb DNA fragment from C18 that conferred the DBT-metabolizing phenotype on *Pseudomonas putida* and *Escherichia coli*. Since this DNA was identified and cloned by its ability to metabolize DBT, we designated this group of genes DOX (for DBT oxidation), but the nucleotide sequence revealed that several of the *dox* open reading frames (ORFs) have sequence identities with genes for enzymes known to degrade other aromatic compounds. These include the naphthalene, biphenyl, benzene, and toluene dioxygenases of *P. putida*. Sequence similarities between the *dox* ORFs and *Pseudomonas* genes involved in naphthalene catabolism (*ndoABC* and *nahC*) suggested that DOX proteins would metabolize naphthalene. Using gas chromatography with a flame ionization detector and mass spectroscopy (GC-FID–MS), we determined that the DOX enzymes degrade naphthalene to salicylate, indicating that the DOX sequence encodes a complete upper naphthalene catabolic pathway.

---

**MATERIALS AND METHODS**

Bacterial strains, media, and reagents. *E. coli* XL1-Blue (Stratagene) is *recA1 lac thi endA1 gyrA96 hsdR17 supE44 relA1 [F' proAB lacI<sup>q</sup> lacZΔM15 Tn10]* (Tet<sup>r</sup>). *E. coli* S17-1, obtained from A. Puhler (Universität Bielefeld), is a derivative of *E. coli* 294 and is *recA thi pro hsdR* (r<sup>−</sup> m<sup>+</sup>) [RP4-2-Tc::Mu-Km::Tn7] (43). *E. coli* CS109, obtained from C. Schnaitman (Arizona State University), is W1485 *thi supE F<sup>−</sup>*. *P. putida* KT2440, obtained from P. Andreoli (Delft University), is *P. putida mt-2 res mod<sup>+</sup>* as originally described by Bagdasarian et al. (2). KT2440 was the negative control used in the DBT assays. *Pseudomonas* sp. strain C18 is a DBT-degrading soil isolate obtained from S. Krawiec (Lehigh University).

*Pseudomonas* minimal salts (PMS) were prepared as described by Giurard and Snell (19) and contained 0.2% glycerol, 40 mM phosphate buffer (pH 6.8), 2% Hutner's mineral base, and 0.1% (NH<sub>4</sub>)<sub>2</sub>SO<sub>4</sub>. Luria broth (LB) contained 1% Bacto tryptone, 0.5% yeast extract, and 1% NaCl. Ampicillin (50 μg/ml), tetracycline (12.5 μg/ml), and kanamycin (50 μg/ml) were included as needed. Naphthalene and phenanthrene were purchased from Aldrich. DBT was purchased from Fluka.

Plasmid vectors. pLAFR5 (used to construct the C18 cosmid library) and pDSK519 (used to subclone C18 DNA under control of the *E. coli lac* promoter) were obtained from N. T. Keen (University of California) (30). pVDtac24, obtained from

* Corresponding author. Electronic mail address: kyoung@vm1.nodak.edu.

A. M. Chakrabarty (University of Illinois) (7), carries the *lacI* repressor gene and was used to place the *E. coli lac* repressor into *P. putida* KT2440. pBluescript (Stratagene) was used to generate nested deletion clones for DNA sequencing.

Cosmid library construction. High-molecular-weight DNA was isolated from C18 by the method of Consevage et al. (4). The DNA was partially digested with Sau3AI, and ~20-kb fragments were isolated from a sodium chloride gradient (17). These fragments were ligated into the *BamHI* site of pLAFR5. In vitro packaging was performed by using Gigapack Plus (Stratagene). Packaged cosmids were transduced into *E. coli* S17-1 (8).

Bacterial matings. The C18 cosmid library (in *E. coli* S17-1) was introduced into *P. putida* KT2440 via conjugal mating. S17-1 colonies containing the C18 cosmid library were recovered from LB-tetracycline plates, resuspended in 7 ml of fresh LB-tetracycline, and shaken at 37°C for 2 h. These cells (0.5 ml at \(5 \times 10^9\) /ml) were mixed with log-phase *P. putida* KT2440 (0.5 ml at \(5 \times 10^9\) /ml), centrifuged briefly (15 s) in a microcentrifuge, resuspended in 50 μl of LB, and incubated at 30°C for 4 h. Cells were plated on PMS-ampicillin-tetracycline and incubated at 30°C. Since *E. coli* plated at high densities can survive on PMS media, ampicillin was included to select against *E. coli*. KT2440 is ampicillin resistant. Individual colonies were isolated, purified, and tested for a DBT-positive phenotype by the DBT plate assay.

DBT plate assay. A plate assay for the identification of bacteria capable of modifying DBT was originally described by Kiyohara et al. (31) and modified by S. Krawiec (34). We further modified the assay as follows. Cells were streaked in small patches (0.5 cm) onto PMS-1% agarose (Bethesda Research Laboratories) plates and grown at 30°C for a minimum of 36 h. By using a chromatographic sprayer, plates were lightly sprayed with 0.1% DBT in ethyl ether. Plates were incubated at 30°C, and fluorescent products around the colonies were detected by viewing them under short-wavelength (254-nm) UV light. Fluorescence was visible as early as 20 min after spraying. Colored products that are visible in white light were also formed, but this color typically took 2 to 18 h to develop fully.

The plate assay was also used to test for metabolism of phenanthrene. With this compound, UV-fluorescent products were readily observed but no brightly colored products were detected. After several days of incubation, cells capable of metabolizing DBT or phenanthrene would also form a clear zone around the colonies, indicating the DBT or phenanthrene had been degraded.

Plasmid DNA isolation. Cosmid DNA (pLAFR5) was isolated as described by Ish-Horowicz and Burke (28). Plasmid DNA (pDSK519 and pBluescript) was isolated by the boiling method of Holmes and Quigley (25).

DNA sequencing, sequence analysis, and construction of *dox* mutants. Deletion clones for DNA sequencing were constructed in pBluescript by using exonuclease III (New England BioLabs) and the method of Henikoff (24). The DNA nucleotide sequences of both strands were determined by the dideoxy-chain termination method of Sanger et al. (41), using Sequenase 2.0 (U.S. Biochemical) and α-³²S-dATP (Amershams). Sequence assembly and analysis were performed by using the DNA Inspector II (Textco, Hanover, N.H.) and PC-Gene (Intelligenetics) computer programs. Protein searches were performed with the Swiss-Prot protein database (CD-Rom release no. 2 from Intelligenetics), using the Dayhoff MDM-78 matrix (6) at a ktuple of 2. Optimal alignments between two protein sequences were determined by the FastP algorithm of Lipman and Pearson (36) at a ktuple of 1.

Frameshift mutations in individual *dox* ORFs were constructed at specific sites in pSAD3EB-3 by partial restriction digestion and blunting ends with DNA polymerase I Klenow fragment (New England BioLabs). Blunt-ended restriction sites were interrupted with HindIII linkers [d(pCAAGCTTG)] (New England BioLabs). The mutations were verified by restriction mapping.

Some of the *dox* mutants were constructed by deleting specific DNA fragments from pSAD3EB-3. After restriction enzyme digestion, incompatible ends were blunt ended with DNA polymerase I Klenow fragment and religated. Δ*doxH* (pSAD31-2) was created by removal of the *PvuII-DraI* fragment. Δ*doxIJ* (pSAD13-23) was created by removal of the *DraI-EcoRI* fragment. Δ*doxDEFGHIJ* (pSAD15-47) was created by removal of the *BamHI-EcoRI* fragment, and Δ*doxEF* (pSAD38-25) was created by removal of the *BstEII-BglII* fragment. The Δ*doxH doxJ* mutant (pSAD89-6) was constructed by using the Δ*doxH* mutant and creating a frameshift mutation in *doxJ* at the HindIII site at nucleotide (nt) 7990.

Hexagonal pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. C18 and *P. putida* KT2440 were grown overnight with shaking at 30°C in LB. Cells were centrifuged at 3,000 × g for 15 min at 4°C and resuspended at \(2 \times 10^9\) /ml in 75 mM NaCl–25 mM EDTA. These cells were warmed to 37°C, and an equal volume of warm (37°C) 2% SeaPlaque agarose (FMC Corp.) in 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4)–10 mM MgCl₂–0.1 mM EDTA was added. The cell-agarose mixture was poured into block molds (5 by 10 by 2 mm) and allowed to solidify at 4°C. Agarose blocks were digested at 56°C for >15 h in 1% Sarkosyl–0.5 mM EDTA–0.5 mg of proteinase K per ml at pH 9.5. Blocks were then equilibrated extensively (>24 h) in 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4)–0.5 mM EDTA and stored in this buffer at 4°C. Blocks were trimmed to 5 by 5 by 1 mm for electrophoresis in an LKB model 2015 Pulsaphor unit (hexagonal electrode array). Gels (15 by 15 cm) were 1% agarose in 0.5× TBE (45 mM Tris base, 50 mM boric acid, and 0.5 mM EDTA). Samples were electrophoresed at 170 V with a 45-s pulse setting for 28 h at 15°C. DNA was visualized by ethidium bromide staining and transferred to a Biotrans nylon membrane (ICN Biomedicals) by the methods of Southern (44). DNA from clone pSADC18-9 was labeled with [α-³²P]dCTP (Amersham) by the method of Feinberg and Vogelstein (15). Hybridizations were performed in 6× SSC–50% formamide (1× SSC is 0.15 M NaCl plus 0.015 M sodium citrate) at 42°C and washed under stringent conditions (0.1× SSC at 50°C) as described by Maniatis et al. (37).

Electrotransformation of KT2440. *P. putida* KT2440 was transformed with plasmid DNA by using a BioRad Gene Pulser. In a 0.2-cm cuvette, 40 μl of KT2440 cells at \(2.8 \times 10^9\) /ml in 300 mM sucrose were pulsed at 25 μF and 1.5 kV, with the pulse controller at 200 Ω. Cells were diluted immediately with 1 ml of LB, shaken at 30°C for 1 h, and plated on LB agar containing appropriate antibiotics.

Naphthalene (phenanthrene) assay and GC-MS. *P. putida* KT2440 cells containing the appropriate plasmids were shaken overnight at 30°C in PMS-kanamycin, washed twice in PMS medium (without glycerol), and used to inoculate 50 ml of PMS (without glycerol)-kanamycin-naphthalene at \(10^7\) cells per ml. Naphthalene was dissolved in ethanol, filter sterilized, and added to the medium for a final concentration of 100 μg/ml. Cells were shaken at 30°C for 3 days, checked for UV fluorescence, and stored at –20°C. For the phenanthrene assays, cultures were prepared as for naphthalene, with the pH adjusted to 6.5.

For analysis, samples were thawed and centrifuged to remove insoluble particulates. The supernatants were acidified

6892 DENOME ET AL.
J. BACTERIOL.

0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 kb

---

9.8kb region required for fluorescence

pSADC18-18  
pSADC18-9  
pSADC18-7  
pSADC18-15  
pSADC18-17  
pSADC18-11  
pSADC18-2  
pSADC18-3  
pSADC18-10  
pSADC18-5  
pSADC18-12 (not fluorescent)

FIG. 1. Physical map for the *dox* region, showing overlapping cosmid clones that confer the DBT-degrading phenotype on *P. putida* and *E. coli*. Arrows indicate that an undetermined amount of DNA remains associated with the vector. Heavy vertical lines designate EcoRI sites. Lighter vertical lines indicate that only one EcoRI site exists but its exact position is undetermined and therefore both possible positions are shown. The boxed area indicates the smallest cloned region of DNA which imparts the ability to degrade DBT to a fluorescent product. pSADC18-12 was color positive but not fluorescent in the DBT assay. The 9.8-kb piece of DNA from pSADC18-3 was used to construct subclone pSAD3EB-3, which was used for sequence analysis.

with hydrochloric acid and extracted three times with ethyl acetate (50 ml). The ethyl acetate extracts were combined, dried with calcium chloride, filtered, and rotary evaporated to dryness. The samples were redissolved in ethyl acetate with *p*-methoxyphenol as an internal standard and analyzed by GC-FID. MS was performed on selected samples for verification of component identities. The ethyl acetate extracts of selected samples were methylated with diazomethane to aid in the detection of acidic intermediates. 1-Hydroxy-2-naphthoic acid was methylated to use as a standard for the phenanthrene analysis. The samples were analyzed on a 5880A Hewlett Packard GC fitted with a DB5 column (60 by 0.25 mm) and 0.25-μm film, using a 1.0-ml/min H₂-carried flow rate at 350°C, an FID with N₂ makeup, and on-column injection.

Nucleotide sequence accession number. The DOX nucleotide sequence has been submitted to GenBank and assigned accession number M60405.

---

**RESULTS**

Isolation of DBT-positive cosmids. High-molecular-weight DNA from C18 was partially digested with Sau3AI and inserted into the BamHI site of pLAFR5. This cosmid library was transduced into *E. coli* S17-1 and mated into *P. putida* KT2440. Transformed colonies were maintained on LB-tetracycline plates. Since tetracycline is fluorescent under UV light, clones were transferred to PMS-agarose plates in order to screen for the production of UV-fluorescent products in the DBT plate assay. Duplicate plating also allowed us to avoid cloning UV-induced mutations. Cosmids could be recovered from colonies grown for several days in the absence of tetracycline (data not shown).

In the DBT plate assay, 23 transformed colonies were distinctively colored in visible light. Of these, 20 were orange and 3 were dark brown. Untransformed KT2440 and KT2440 transformed with pLAFR5 were not colored when sprayed with DBT. All orange colonies were UV fluorescent in the presence of DBT, but the brown colonies were not fluorescent in the DBT assay. The 23 positive clones were designated pSADC18-1 to -23. Cosmid DNA was purified from each clone and used to transform *E. coli* S17-1. Cosmids were mated into naive KT2440 and retested to confirm that the cosmids carried DNA that conferred the DBT-positive phenotype.

Subcloning the DBT-modifying genes. Cosmid DNAs from 11 unique pSADC18 clones were digested with EcoRI and separated on 1% agarose gels. These fragments were transferred to a Biotrans nylon membrane and hybridized with ³²P-labeled C18 DNA from pSADC18-9. All the clones shared at least some portion of an 18-kb EcoRI fragment (Fig. 1). pSADC18-3 contained 9.8 kb of this 18-kb fragment and retained DBT-dependent fluorescence. Clone pSADC18-12, which contained 6.5 kb of the 18-kb fragment, produced a brown nonfluorescent product in the DBT plate assay.

The 9.8-kb EcoRI fragment from pSADC18-3 was subcloned into pDSK519 in both orientations. When transformed into KT2440, only subclone pSAD3EB-3 was colored (orange) and fluorescent in the DBT assay. Clones containing the 9.8-kb fragment in the opposite orientation were not. This suggested that the endogenous C18 promoter had been removed and that the genes were being expressed from the lac promoter in the

vector. Since *P. putida* does not contain a *lac* repressor, the genes encoded by pSAD3EB-3 were expressed constitutively in KT2440. KT2440 containing pSAD3EB-3 was transformed with pVDtac24, which encodes the *lac* repressor. The resulting strain was negative in the DBT assay unless IPTG (isopropyl-β-D-thiogalactopyranoside) (5 mM) was added to inactivate the *lac* repressor. This confirmed that the genes encoded by pSAD3EB-3 were being expressed from the *lac* promoter.

Not all the *dox* genes are expressed in *E. coli*. The pSADC18 cosmid clones isolated in *P. putida* were transferred to *E. coli* CS109 and tested in the plate assay. All were orange or brown in the presence of DBT, but none were UV fluorescent, suggesting that only a subset of the DBT-degrading genes are expressed in *E. coli*. Subclone pSAD3EB-3 was transformed into *E. coli* XL1-Blue, and expression from the *lac* promoter was induced with IPTG (1 mM). When sprayed with DBT, these colonies were still color positive (orange) but were not UV fluorescent.

**Presumptive indigo formation by *dox* clones.** The production of indigo from indole is known to be a property of the naphthalene dioxygenase genes (11, 35). *P. putida* KT2440 colonies containing any of the pSADC18 clones had no unusual color when grown on PMS or LB plates. This was also true for *E. coli* S17-1. However, *E. coli* CS109 transformed with the pSADC18 clones formed blue colonies on LB, but not on PMS, plates. This blue color formed in the absence of DBT. When the pSADC18 clones in *E. coli* CS109 were grown on PMS-thiamine (5 μg/ml) without or with tryptophan (40 μg/ml), the blue color formed only when tryptophan was present, indicating that the pSADC18 clones might be converting indole to indigo. All the pSADC18 clones exhibited a blue color in LB medium in *E. coli* CS109 and XL1-Blue, including those clones which were brown but not fluorescent in the presence of DBT. We do not know why indigo was not produced in *E. coli* S17-1 even though the strain was indole positive, indicating that S17-1 contained the enzyme tryptophanase. Tryptophanase transforms tryptophan to indole, the substrate from which naphthalene dioxygenase produces indigo (11, 35). Indigo was not produced in KT2440, consistent with the absence of tryptophanase.

**DOX genes are located on a plasmid in C18.** Endogenous plasmids in C18 were separated from chromosomal DNA by hexagonal pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. Immobilization of whole cells in agarose blocks prior to cell disruption eliminated mechanical breakage of the chromosome and any large plasmids. Ethidium bromide staining revealed two major plasmids (325 and 75 kb), with a minor band at 150 kb (Fig. 2). Southern analysis using ³²P-labeled C18 DNA from pSADC18-9 as the probe revealed that the DBT-modifying genes are located on the 75-kb plasmid. Faint hybridization to the 150-kb plasmid was also detected. This band may be a dimer of the 75-kb plasmid. No hybridization to either the 700-kb chromosomal DNA band or the 325-kb band was detected. Genomic blots hybridized under low-stringency conditions indicated that there was only one copy of the 9.8-kb DNA in the genome (data not shown).

**DNA sequence analysis.** One hundred thirty-seven individual clones generated by the exonuclease III deletion strategy were used to sequence both strands of the 9.8-kb fragment from pSAD3EB-3 (Fig. 3). Analysis of the DNA sequence revealed 10 ORFs. All started with methionine and were greater than 100 amino acids in length. We refer to nine of these (*doxABDEFGHIJ*) as the DOX genes (DBT oxidation), since they were identified and cloned by their ability to metabolize DBT. Possible ribosomal binding sites, on the basis of complementarity to the 3′ end of 16S rRNA from *Pseudo*-

FIG. 2. Identification of a 75-kb endogenous C18 plasmid that contains the *dox* genes. (A) Ethidium bromide-stained agarose gel of DNA separated by hexagonal pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. Lane 1 contained 1.3 μg of λI857 Sam7 DNA concatemers in 48.5-kb increments. Lanes 2 and 3 contained C18 and KT2440 DNAs, respectively. (B) Autoradiograph of gel in panel A, showing the hybridization of ³²P-labeled DNA from pSADC18-9 to the 75- and 150-kb plasmid bands of C18. Note the absence of any hybridization of the probe to the chromosomal DNA band (approximately 700 kb).

*monas aeruginosa* (42), have been identified for all the *dox* ORFs except *orfC*. All the *dox* ORFs (except *orfC* and *doxJ*) have methionines very close to their 5′ ends. *orfC* and *doxJ* could utilize GTG as the start codon for protein synthesis.

A search of the Swiss-Prot protein data base identified a number of proteins with significant similarities to the predicted protein products of *doxABDEFG* (Table 1). *doxABD* are identical to the *ndoABC* genes that encode naphthalene dioxygenase in *P. putida* NCIB9816 (35). *DoxG* is very similar to NahC (1,2-dihydroxynaphthalene dioxygenase) from *P. putida* (20) at both the nucleotide and predicted amino acid levels. *DoxABDEG* also have similarities to proteins known to be involved in the oxidative degradation of toluene (49), benzene (27), and biphenyl (12). *doxF* is similar to aldehyde dehydrogenases from rats (9, 14), horses (29), humans (3, 22, 23), *Aspergillus nidulans* (40), *Pseudomonas oleovorans* (33), and *E. coli* (21). No significant similarities were found for *doxHIJ*.

GC analysis shows that *dox* clones convert naphthalene to salicylate. GC-FID–MS data for the DBT metabolic intermediates produced by pSAD3EB-3 were difficult to interpret because of a lack of suitable standards. Since the nucleotide sequence analysis revealed sequence similarities between DOX and the naphthalene catabolic pathway (NAH), we grew pSAD3EB-3 with naphthalene and analyzed supernatants for NAH metabolic intermediates. GC-FID–MS analysis revealed that DOX enabled *P. putida* KT2440 to convert naphthalene to salicylate.

GAATCATCAGGAAAGACATTTCAAATGACGTAACAAATGGCGCAGGCTGATTTTGGGGGCAGGCAAATGCTCCCCAAAATTCGCCCATATT 2160
doxB ThrIleArgAlaAlaSerValPheAlaAlaAlaLysCYSerLeuAsnSerSerPro
>>>>
ACC CCACTTGAGGATGCTTTTAGACGTAAGGTGAAAGCCAGTGCCTTTCTGACAATCCTTGAGGTGACGTTCCCTCGGCGTGACT 180
ThrProSerGluAspCysPheMETThrValLysTrpLeuGluAlaValAlaLeuSerAspIleLeuGluGlyAspValLeuGlyValThr
HIS GinLysAspProGlnAsnTrpGlyAsnSerProLysLeuArgPheThrAshValGlnAlaAlaMetAspValAsn
GTC GAGGCAAGAGGACCTGGCCCTGTAGAAGGTGTAAGGCGGAATAACTGGCACAACTAGGCACTGGTCCCCCGCCGATGAGT 270
ValGluGlySerGluLeuAlaLeuTyrGluVaIGluGlyGluLeuTyrAlaThrAspAnLeuCySThrHisGlySerAlaArgMetSer
GAC AAAGAGGACTACTCACATCCCCCTCCAACGGCAGCGGTGCACTCTGCACGGGCACCCGGGAA 2340
AspLysGluLeuAluHisIleArgSerAsnValIIIeLeuHisThrLIsAsnLeu
GAT GTGTTACTCGAGGTTAGAAAAATCGAAAGCCCCCTTGCAAGGGCAAAGCCCCTGGCGGCACCCCTG 360
GATGTTACTCGAGGTTAGAAAAATCGAAAGCCCCCTTGCAAGGGCAAAGCCCCTGGCGGCACCCCTG
ASP Gly Tyr LeuGluGlyArgGluIeGluCysProLeuHisGlnGlyArgPheAspValCysThrGlyLysAlaLeuCysAlaProVal 450
AspLysTrpLysArgGlyGlulGlyVAlArgySLeuValGlnArgPheValAspTyrProGluArgIleLeuGlnThrLIsAsnLeu
ACA GAAACATCAAAACATATCCAGTCAAAGACTGGAGACCTCGCGGTAATGTTGAGCTAAGAATTTTAAACAGGGGCACCCCCGG 2520
ThrGlnAsnLysLysThrTyProValLysLGluAsnLeuArgValMetlI@AspLeuSerSTOP
GCC TTAGAGCTAATACCCCCAATCCCACTTTTATAGGTGAAAAACATGAAATTTACAATAAAACTTGGTAAGTGAAACTCGCTTGAG 540
doxB SerValII@ThrProIeProSerPhalLeuGlyGluAsnMETAstTyRAsnAsnLysSIeLeuValSerGlyLeuS9
>>>>
CCAAAAGACCTGATTCAAGCGGATGAAGAACTTTCCAACATGAAACACTTTTGGGGGAACCTGGCTTTTCTCATTCA TGA 630
RG INLYSHIOLouIeHisGlyAspGluLGluLoPheGlnHisSGluLeuLysThrIlePheAlaArgAsnTrpLauPheLeuThrHisAS
CTC CTGTCAGGAAACAGGAGCAAGAGGCCCTCTTTGCAAAAGAGTCAAGGACCACTCGAGATCTGGGCGATGGGCGGCTTATAACGGGCTTATACGGTATCCG 2700
laLeuValArgSnGluGluGluAlaLouCysLySgluphelysAspAlaLeuGluIaIVaIVaIGlyAspValAqGSPHI3A
TAG CCTGATCCCGCCCCCGGACTATGTTACCGCAAAAATGGGATTTGACGGGTTCGATCGTCCCCGGGAGAAAGCGGTTGCATCG 2790
Pse rLeuIeProAlaProGlyAspTyrValthrAlaLysMetGlyVIeAspGluValII@ValSerArgInAsnAspGlySerIleAR
CA CAATJTGAGAAGCTGATAAAAGCAAACATCGATAGATGCGGTAACTTTATTTGCAAATGCCGGTANCTGGGATATCGGCTATTCAGTGCATCGC
TGTTTCTGAAACCTTTGGGGAAGGCAAAATATCGGCAACATTAATGCAAGAGCTATTCAGTGGCAITCAGTG
gAl @PhoLeuAsnValCysArgHISArgGlySThrLeuVIS@rValGluAlaLglyAsnAlaLysGlyphevalCysSerTyrlH3GL
laThraSnGluYsLeuIILysInThrIleAsprgPhaGlyHIILeuAspCySPheII@AlAasnAlaGlyIleTrpAPPYrMetL
TGG ACTCGAAGAGCCTTTGGGAGAAATATCGAGCAGGTTTTTGACGAAATTCAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCAATAGGCA
GTTCGCCAAATTCGGTGAGGCGGACTCAATGGTTGTCTCAAAGACCCGATGCACAAGGGGCCAAAAGTTGTTTCCCCGGGCGTTGGCCCCA 4410
ValSerProAsnSerGlyGluArgIleArgLysLeuPheLysAspAlaIleAspLysGlyAlaLysValAlaCysGlyGlyLeuAlaGln 4500
GGTGCCCTCATGCGGCCACAGGTCCTGGATCACGGTAACATTGACATGGCGGAGACTTACGGATGGAGGAGACCTTGGTCCCCATACCCGGGTA 6750
ValSerMetSerArgLysIleMetLysThrIleLeuAspHisValLysSerAspMetAlaGluLeuTyrFaspGluGluThrPheGlyProIleThrValAla 6840
TACTCGGAGTGAATTACTGGCATCACGGACAGGACTTTGGGTGGCTATTTGGGCGGCGTATTTGGGCGGCTTTGGGCTGAGGCGGCACTCAAC 4590
ProAspAlaSerAspTrpArgSerThrL AlaThrValAlaSpIeValGluGluLeuIleAlaGlyValAsn 6930
ACC GGT GTA AAA AGG CGA AGG CAG GCC TCC CGCA ATT TGG CCG ATG TCG TCG GCG GTAT TTT TGG GGT GAG TGG GC CAC AGT GCA ACC 4680
GTT ACT CAAG TAT TGG GGT AC TAT TTT TG GGT GAG TGG GC CAC AGT GCA ACC AAG CTG AAT TAT GCT JCG GAG GAG CAC CAT 7110
Gly Ile Leu Ser Met Gly Thr Phe Gly Glu CyJ3AIa Thr Leu Thr L Trp ApG l uLy J3Arq P ty r Val S or Thr LI o Val Glu Thr LI o 7200
CGCGGCTAGCGGTGGTATGCCGAATAGGTTCTGTACACATCAACGGTTCCGACAGAGGGCGACCTCTTAGGA 4770
CGGTGGCGGTGCTTATTTTCTGTGGCGCACAGCACAGCCTTAAAAATACCCGAGAAGACTCCGGAGAGCTTATCGGAFAT TGGGCCCA 7380
Arg Gly Arg Val I Pro Tyr Phe Cy s Gly Thr Thr Al a Leu Asn Thr FGl uV al I le Arg Glu Thr Ar g Glu Lu ul I aS pI lo Gly Ala 7560
GCCACCAAGACACCGCTAGCGAGGCCCTCGAACAGGAGGACGATCAACAGACAAAGGCTGACACATCGAACACTTC 4860
AACGGCACTATGCGGCGGTGGAAGAGGACTTGGGACTTCTATCGGACTCACAGGCTTACAGGACTTACAGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCGGAGATGCG
TABLE 1. Summary of proteins with similarity to products of dox ORFs

| dox ORF | Similar gene (organism)                          | % Identity$^a$ | Enzyme                                      | Reference |
|---------|-------------------------------------------------|----------------|---------------------------------------------|-----------|
| $A$     | $ndoA (P. putida)$                             | 100.00         | Naphthalene dioxygenase                     | 35        |
|         | $bphF (Pseudomonas \text{sp.})$                 | 38.20          | Biphenyl dioxygenase (ferredoxin)           | 12        |
|         | $todB (P. putida)$                             | 35.60          | Toluene dioxygenase (ferredoxin)            | 49        |
|         | $P3 (P. putida)$                               | 44.00          | Benzene dioxygenase complex                 | 27        |
| $B$     | $ndoB (P. putida)$                             | 100.00         | Naphthalene dioxygenase                     | 35        |
|         | $bphA (Pseudomonas \text{sp.})$                 | 41.00          | Biphenyl dioxygenase (iron-sulfur protein)   | 12        |
|         | $todC1 (P. putida)$                            | 34.30          | Toluene dioxygenase (iron-sulfur protein)   | 49        |
|         | $P1 (P. putida)$                               | 33.60          | Benzene dioxygenase complex                 | 27        |
| $D$     | $ndoC (P. putida)$                             | 100.00         | Naphthalene dioxygenase                     | 35        |
|         | $bphE (Pseudomonas \text{sp.})$                 | 23.20          | Biphenyl dioxygenase (iron-sulfur protein)   | 12        |
|         | $todC2 (P. putida)$                            | 22.00          | Toluene dioxygenase (iron-sulfur protein)   | 49        |
|         | $P2 (P. putida)$                               | 22.00          | Benzene dioxygenase complex                 | 27        |
| $E$     | $todD (P. putida)$                             | 37.40          | cis-Toluene dihydrodiol dehydrogenase       | 49        |
|         | $P5 (P. putida)$                               | 40.30          | Benzene dioxygenase complex                 | 27        |
| $F$     | ALDH (human cytosolic)                         | 36.80          | Aldehyde dehydrogenase                      | 23        |
|         | ALDH (human mitochondrial)                      | 33.80          | Aldehyde dehydrogenase                      | 3         |
|         | ALDH (rat cytosolic)                           | 36.80          | Aldehyde dehydrogenase                      | 9         |
|         | ALDH (rat mitochondrial)                       | 34.40          | Aldehyde dehydrogenase                      | 14        |
|         | ALDH (horse mitochondrial)                     | 33.80          | Aldehyde dehydrogenase                      | 29        |
|         | $aldA (A. nidulans)$                           | 37.40          | Aldehyde dehydrogenase                      | 40        |
|         | $aldH (E. coli)$                               | 31.50          | Aldehyde dehydrogenase                      | 21        |
|         | $alkH (P. oleovorans)$                         | 28.40          | Aldehyde dehydrogenase                      | 33        |
| $G$     | $nahC (P. putida)$                             | 97.40          | 1,2-Dihydroxynaphthalene dioxygenase        | 20        |
|         | $bphC (Pseudomonas paucimobilis)$               | 59.60          | 2,3-Dihydroxybiphenyl dioxygenase           | 46        |
|         | $bphC (Pseudomonas pseudoalcaligenes)$          | 36.40          | 2,3-Dihydroxybiphenyl dioxygenase           | 18        |
|         | $todE (P. putida)$                             | 35.10          | 3-Methylcatechol-2,3-dioxygenase           | 49        |

$^a$ Percentage of identical amino acids when sequences are optimally aligned by using the FastP algorithm of Lipman and Pearson (36) at a ktuple of 1.

A similar analysis showed that phenanthrene was converted to 1-hydroxy-2-naphthoic acid. This indicated that the same DOX enzymes degraded DBT, naphthalene, and phenanthrene. We could not detect any production of salicylate from phenanthrene, indicating that DOX does not encode an enzyme that converts 1-hydroxy-2-naphthoic acid to 1,2-dihydroxynaphthalene, as in the pathway proposed by Evans et al. (13).

Analysis of $dox$ mutants. We constructed clones from pSAD3EB-3 that contained mutations in individual $dox$ ORFs. Each mutant was evaluated by the DBT plate assay, and two phenotypes were observed. If the entire pathway was functional, a UV-fluorescent product was observed around the colony. Many of the mutants lost the ability to produce this fluorescent product. In addition, some of the mutant colonies were colored in the presence of DBT. The color produced depended on which ORF was mutated (Table 2). The mutants were also evaluated for the ability to produce a blue color when grown on LB medium. The production of this blue color (presumably indigo) was tryptophan dependent and is known to be a property of the naphthalene dioxygenase genes (11, 35).

These same mutants were grown in the presence of naphthalene and analyzed for the accumulation of naphthalene metabolic intermediates by GC-FID–MS. In all cases, the results were consistent with those of the DBT plate assay (Table 2). Most importantly, only those $dox$ mutants capable of producing a UV-fluorescent product from DBT metabolized naphthalene to salicylate (which is also UV fluorescent). One clone, containing mutations in both $doxH$ and $doxJ$, converted naphthalene to an unidentified UV-fluorescent product that was not salicylate. Using GC-FID–MS and the $dox$ mutants, we found evidence for the production of the following intermediates from naphthalene: methyl cis-o-hydroxybenzylidenepyruvate, with a molecular ion at $m/z$ 206 corresponding to the methyl ester and fragment ions at $m/z$ 89 and 63 (the methyl ether was not formed with diazomethane, indicating the cyclic cis isomer was probably present); methyl trans-o-hydroxybenzylidenepyruvate, with a molecular ion at $m/z$ 220 corresponding to the methyl ester ether derivative and fragment ions at $m/z$ 206, 205, 189, 177, 161, 145, and 129 (the methyl ether formed with diazomethane, indicating that the noncyclic trans isomer was probably present); coumarin, with a molecular ion at $m/z$ 146 and fragments matching the standard at $m/z$ 118, 90, 89, 63, and 50; and dihydrocoumarin, with a molecular ion at $m/z$ 148 and fragments matching the standard at $m/z$ 120, 119, 91, 78, 63, 51, and 42 (Table 2). Coumarin is reported to be a metabolic dead-end product of the naphthalene pathway formed from the oxidative decarboxylation of o-hydroxybenzylidenepyruvate (5). The following is a summary of the information we have for each $dox$ ORF.

(i) $doxA$ mutants. No individual $doxA$ mutants were constructed, but sequence similarities between DoxA and the dioxygenases of naphthalene ($NdoA$) (100%), benzene (44%), biphenyl (38%), and toluene (36%) indicate that DoxA is probably a component of the naphthalene dioxygenase complex (38). The sequence for $nahA$ is not available.

(ii) $doxB$ mutants. $doxB$ mutants could not produce UV-fluorescent products from DBT or naphthalene. $doxB$ mutants could not produce indigo, indicating the dioxygenase was not functional. No intermediates of naphthalene metabolism were detectable by GC-MS. These results and the sequence similarities between DoxB and the dioxygenases of naphthalene ($NdoB$) (100%), benzene (34%), biphenyl (41%), and toluene (34%) lead us to conclude that $doxB$ also encodes a component of the naphthalene dioxygenase complex. Neidle et al. have compared the relationships among many of these multicomponent oxygenases (38), and $doxA$ and $doxB$ are new members of this group.

(iii) $orfC$ mutants. We could not construct mutations in $orfC$ without mutating $doxB$ or $doxD$. We could not find any

TABLE 2. Summary of DOX mutations and DBT-naphthalene assays

| Clone       | Mutation(s) | Description of mutation                          | DBT-naphthalene assay (UV fluorescence) | DBT assay (visible color) | Indigo | Naphthalene assay [identified intermediate(s)] |
|-------------|-------------|-------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|---------------------------|--------|------------------------------------------------|
| pDSK519     | None        | None, vector only                               | –                                       | None                      | –      | None                                           |
| pSAD3EB-3   | None        | None, intact 9.8-kb EcoRI fragment               | +                                       | Yellow-orange             | +      | Salicylate (252 μg)                             |
| pSAD16-6    | doxB        | PstI destroyed at nt 840                        | –                                       | Yellow-orange             | –      | None                                           |
| pSAD17-3    | doxD        | BamHI destroyed at nt 2169                      | –                                       | Yellow-orange             | –      | None                                           |
| pSAD21-14   | doxE        | BstEII destroyed at nt 2483                     | +                                       | Yellow-orange             | +      | Salicylate (87 μg)                              |
| pSAD106-5   | doxE        | SspI destroyed at nt 2839                       | –                                       | Light brown               | +      | Not determined                                  |
| pSAD33-5    | doxF        | BglII destroyed at nt 4184                      | +                                       | Yellow-orange             | +      | Salicylate (503 μg)                             |
| pSAD14-4    | doxG        | NdeI destroyed at nt 5482                       | –                                       | Dark brown                | +      | Not identified                                  |
| pSAD31-2    | doxH        | nt 6279–6629 deleted                           | +                                       | Yellow-orange             | +      | Salicylate (374 μg)                             |
| pSAD24-38   | doxI        | PvuII destroyed at nt 6829                      | –                                       | Dark orange               | +      | Coumarin, dihydrocoumarin, trans-o-hydroxybenzylidenepyruvate |
| pSAD22-3    | doxJ        | HindIII destroyed at nt 8292                    | +                                       | Yellow-orange             | +      | Salicylate (371 μg)                             |
| pSAD13-23   | doxIdoxJ    | nt 6629–9841 deleted                           | –                                       | Dark orange               | +      | Coumarin, dihydrocoumarin, cis-o-hydroxybenzylidenepyruvate |
| pSAD15-47   | doxDEFGHIJ  | nt 2169–9841 deleted                           | –                                       | None                      | –      | None                                           |
| pSAD38-25   | doxEDoxF    | nt 2483–4184 deleted                           | –                                       | Light brown               | +      | Not identified                                  |
| pSAD89-6    | doxHdoxJ    | nt 6279–6629 deleted and HindIII destroyed at nt 7990 | +                                       | Yellow-orange             | +      | Coumarin                                        |

similarities between the sequence of the predicted orfC product and other known protein sequences. It is probable that orfC is not a functional gene since it is the only dox ORF lacking a suitable ribosomal binding site as determined by complementarity to the 3' end of 16S rRNA from *P. aeruginosa* (42).

(iv) doxD mutants. doxD mutants could not produce UV-fluorescent products from DBT or naphthalene. No intermediates of naphthalene metabolism were detectable by GC-MS. doxD mutants could not produce indigo, indicating that the dioxygenase was not functional. These results and the sequence similarities between DoxD and the dioxygenases of naphthalene (NdoC) (100%), benzene (22%), biphenyl (23%), and toluene (22%) led us to conclude that doxD may encode a component of the naphthalene dioxygenase complex (38).

(v) doxE mutants. doxE contains two possible translational start sites, the methionines at nt 2466 and 2514. When doxE was mutated at a position between these two methionines (at nt 2483), the clones continued to produce UV-fluorescent products from DBT and naphthalene. Salicylate was produced from naphthalene, although the amount produced was less than that observed with the nonmutated clone (87 versus 252 μg). When doxE was mutated at a position after the second methionine (at nt 2839), the colonies were light brown in the presence of DBT. No UV-fluorescent products were produced from DBT or naphthalene. The ability to produce indigo was not lost, indicating that the naphthalene dioxygenase complex was not mutated. No salicylate was produced from naphthalene. These results suggest that translation from the second methionine is sufficient to produce a functional DoxE protein.

Sequence similarity searches found the predicted DoxE protein to be similar to cis-toluene dihydrodiol dehydrogenase (37%) and the P5 component of the benzene dioxygenase complex (40%). These proteins are a subset of a growing family of short-chain alcohol dehydrogenases (39). The sequence for the naphthalene equivalent of this enzyme is not available. The sequence similarities and our experimental data led us to conclude that doxE encodes cis-naphthalene dihydrol dehydrogenase (nahB), but we were unable to identify the unstable naphthalene metabolic intermediate (cis-1,2-dihydroxy-1,2-dihydronaphthalene) that should have accumulated with a doxE mutant.

(vi) doxF mutants. The doxF mutants produced UV-fluorescent products from both DBT and naphthalene. Salicylate was identified as a product of naphthalene metabolism, and the mutants remained capable of producing indigo, indicating that doxF does not encode part of the naphthalene dioxygenase complex.

In the naphthalene operon, nahF encodes salicylaldehyde dehydrogenase, but the sequence is unavailable. Sequence searches indicated that DoxF is similar to the aldehyde dehydrogenases of many different organisms and may be the equivalent of NahF. The highly conserved amino acid sequence LELGGKSP is present in all sequenced aldehyde dehydrogenases, as well as in DoxF. In the human liver enzyme, the glutamate residue in this sequence is part of the enzyme's active site (1). Horn et al. discussed the significance of conserved amino acid residues in the activity of the aldehyde dehydrogenase superfamily (26).

The naphthalene pathway of the doxF mutant was complete and produced salicylate. We were unable to detect accumulation of the expected intermediate, salicylaldehyde. There are several possible explanations for the unaffected phenotype of the doxF mutants. First, the mutation could be in frame, resulting in a functional protein. Second, doxF may be unnecessary in the pathway. This is unlikely since salicylaldehyde dehydrogenase has been identified as a component of the NAH pathway. Third, since both doxE and doxF encode dehydrogenases, it is possible that the DoxE protein can substitute for DoxF in the pathway, though the evidence suggests that the DoxF protein cannot substitute for DoxE. Finally, an aldehyde dehydrogenase encoded by a chromosomal gene may be substituting for DoxF.

(vii) doxE doxF mutants. The ΔdoxEF mutant behaved exactly like the doxE clone that was mutated after the second methionine (see above).

(viii) doxG mutants. doxG mutants produced a dark brown product in the presence of DBT, naphthalene, or phenanthrene. No UV-fluorescent products were formed from DBT or naphthalene. Although salicylate was not produced from naphthalene, we did detect an unidentified product. The doxG mutant could still produce indigo, indicating that the doxG product is not a part of the naphthalene dioxygenase complex.

Sequence similarity searches revealed that DoxG is very similar to the NahC protein (1,2-dihydroxynaphthalene dioxygenase) (97%), 2,3-dihydroxybiphenyl dioxygenase (60%), and 3-methylcatechol-2,3-dioxygenase (35%). In fact, the predicted protein product of *doxG* differs from the NahC protein at only eight amino acids, indicating that *doxG* encodes 1,2-dihydroxynaphthalene dioxygenase.

Although we could not identify the predicted naphthalene intermediate (1,2-dihydroxynaphthalene) that should result from the inactivation of 1,2-dihydroxynaphthalene dioxygenase, the *doxG* mutant did produce a dark brown product in the DBT plate assay. 1,2-Dihydroxynaphthalene is reported to be a colorless compound that readily oxidizes at pH 7.0 to form the quinone, which is brown (5). Our assays were normally performed at pH 6.8, and the brown products produced from the *doxG* mutant are probably quinones. Samples of commercially available 1,2-dihydroxynaphthalene (obtained from Aldrich) were also dark brown. Such a product has not been described for the DBT pathway, but considering the similarities of these compounds, it is very likely that a quinone is also formed from 1,2-dihydroxydibenzothiophene.

(ix) *doxH* mutants. Δ*doxH* mutants produced a light yellow-orange color in the presence of DBT, and UV-fluorescent products were formed from DBT and naphthalene. Naphthalene was metabolized to salicylate, and the Δ*doxH* mutant could still produce indigo. We could not find any similarities between the DoxH sequence and other known protein sequences. Mutations in *doxH* do not appear to affect the pathway. Since the Δ*doxH* mutation is a large deletion, it is unlikely that any functional DoxH protein is being produced. It appears that *doxH* is not essential for the pathway to function. However, a Δ*doxH doxJ* double mutant indicated otherwise (see “*doxH doxJ* mutants” below). There is no recognized NAH equivalent of *doxH*.

(x) *doxI* mutants. *doxI* mutants produced a dark orange product in the presence of DBT. No UV-fluorescent products were formed from DBT or naphthalene, and no salicylate could be detected. Instead, *doxI* mutants accumulated coumarin, dihydrocoumarin, and trans-*o*-hydroxybenzylidenepyruvate as naphthalene-metabolic intermediates. Coumarin is a dead-end metabolic product that has been previously associated with the naphthalene catabolic pathway (5). The *doxI* mutants were capable of producing indigo in LB medium, indicating that *doxI* does not encode naphthalene dioxygenase.

We could not find similarities between the DoxI sequence and any other known protein sequence. From the metabolism of naphthalene to trans-*o*-hydroxybenzylidenepyruvate, we can conclude that *doxI* encodes a protein similar to NahE (trans-*o*-hydroxybenzylidenepyruvate hydratase-aldolase). The sequence for *nahE* is unavailable.

(xi) *doxJ* mutants. Mutations in *doxJ* do not appear to affect the pathway. *doxJ* mutants produced a light yellow-orange color in the presence of DBT, and UV-fluorescent products were formed from DBT and naphthalene. Naphthalene was metabolized to salicylate, and the *doxJ* mutant could still produce indigo. We could not find any similarities between the DoxJ sequence and other known protein sequences. Although it appears that *doxJ* is not essential for the pathway to function, a Δ*doxH doxJ* double mutant indicated otherwise (see “*doxH doxJ* mutants” below).

(xii) *doxI doxJ* mutants. Clones containing mutations in both *doxI* and *doxJ* behaved exactly the same as the *doxI* single mutant.

(xiii) *doxH doxJ* mutants. The Δ*doxH doxJ* double mutants produced a light yellow-orange color in the presence of DBT and also produced UV-fluorescent products from DBT and

naphthalene. The difference between the Δ*doxH doxJ* double mutant and either the Δ*doxH* or *doxJ* single mutant was that the UV-fluorescent product produced from naphthalene was not salicylate. This UV-fluorescent product was not identified. Coumarin was identified as a naphthalene intermediate with the Δ*doxH doxJ* double mutant, but this product did not accumulate with either the Δ*doxH* or *doxJ* single mutant. These results indicated that DoxH and DoxJ may have similar enzymatic functions that can substitute for one another in the naphthalene catabolic pathway and that only mutations in both ORFs prevented completion of the pathway to salicylate.

DISCUSSION

A 9.8-kb DNA fragment cloned from a pseudomonad soil isolate (C18) was found to encode proteins capable of metabolizing DBT, naphthalene, and phenanthrene. This DNA was sequenced and found to contain 10 ORFs greater than 100 amino acids in length. We have designated these ORFs the DOX pathway (DBT oxidation), since they were cloned by their ability to degrade DBT. Sequence analysis revealed that DOX encodes proteins similar to those that degrade other aromatic compounds, including naphthalene, benzene, biphenyl, and toluene. However, C18 does not have, and the cloned *dox* genes do not encode, the capability to metabolize either benzene or toluene (data not shown).

DOX is a naphthalene catabolic pathway. We found that C18 can use naphthalene as a sole carbon source (data not shown), but the DOX clones were capable only of metabolizing naphthalene to salicylate. This indicated that DOX does not include genes involved in the degradation of salicylate to pyruvate. Consistent with this conclusion is the fact that we did not find any similarities between DOX and sequences from the salicylate operon.

Many different naphthalene catabolic plasmids have been identified in pseudomonads (48). Much of the biochemical analysis of the upper naphthalene pathway was derived by using the NAH7 catabolic plasmid, and the genes encoding this pathway are designated *nah*. The amino acid sequence of NahC is identical to that of DoxG at 294 of 302 amino acid positions. The *ndo* genes were cloned from *P. putida* NCIB9816 and were not derived from an NAH7 plasmid. The exact identities of *doxABD* to *ndoABC* indicate that they may be derived from the same catabolic plasmid group. The similarity of the *dox*, *nah*, and *ndo* sequences indicates that these catabolic plasmid groups are closely related. Using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis, we determined that in C18 the DOX genes reside on a 75-kb plasmid, which is very close to the size of the NAH7 plasmid (83 kb). Other sequences from NAH have not been published, so we cannot determine the extent of the sequence similarity between NAH and DOX.

The NAH pathway may include another gene. The genetic and biochemical pathways of the NAH operon have recently been revised by Eaton and Chapman (10) (Fig. 4 and 5). It is interesting that the genetic order of the NAH genes is identical to the order of the DOX genes, with the exception of *doxH*. Comparison of the DOX sequence and the NAH restriction map of Eaton and Chapman (10) indicated a high degree of sequence similarity between NAH and DOX (Fig. 5). In fact, there is a very good correlation between the restriction sites of *nahD* and *doxJ*, which suggests that they may encode similar enzymes. Eaton and Chapman concluded that the *nahD* product is responsible for the isomerization of 2-hydroxychromene-2-carboxylate to trans-*o*-hydroxybenzylidenepyruvate, but they thought that this isomerization also occurred spontaneously. Although our Δ*doxH* and *doxJ* mutants produced salicylate

Vol. 175, 1993

DBT AND NAPHTHALENE METABOLISM GENES 6899

![Chemical Structures and Restriction Maps]

FIG. 4. The revised upper naphthalene catabolic pathway (NAH) of Eaton and Chapman (10). The biochemical function proposed for each DOX and NAH enzyme is indicated. Chemical designations: I, naphthalene; II, cis-1,2-dihydroxy-1,2-dihydronaphthalene; III, 1,2-dihydroxynaphthalene; IV, 2-hydroxy-4-(2′-oxo-3,5-cyclohexadienyl)-buta-2,4-dienoate; V, cis-o-hydroxybenzylidenepyruvate; VI, 2-hydroxychromene-2-carboxylate; VII, trans-o-hydroxybenzylidene-pyruvate; VIII, salicylaldehyde; IX, salicylate; X, 1,2-naphthoquinone; XI, coumarin.

FIG. 5. Comparisons of restriction sites in NAH (determined by restriction mapping [10]) and DOX (determined from the DNA sequence). Heavy lines indicate conserved restriction sites. In *doxJ*, the parentheses designate a large part of the ORF that precedes the first methionine in the sequence. B, *Bam*HI; Bg, *Bgl*II; C, unmethylated *Cla*I; E, *Eco*RI; H, *Hind*III; K, *Kpn*I; M, *Mlu*I; N, *Nhe*I; P, *Pst*I; S, *Sac*I; Sl, *Sal*I; Sm, *Sma*I; St, *Stu*I; X, *Xho*I.

from naphthalene, the Δ*doxH doxJ* double mutants were unable to metabolize naphthalene to salicylate. This indicates that the functions of *doxJ* and *doxH* are interchangeable in the NAH pathway but that either *doxH* or *doxJ* must be present for the metabolism of naphthalene to salicylate. Yen and Gunsalus identified an isomerase gene (which they called *nahD*) that mapped between *nahC* and *nahE* on the NAH7 plasmid (47). This is precisely where *doxH* is located. The NAH equivalent of *doxH* should reside between *nahC* and *nahE* (Fig. 5), but since NAH has not been completely sequenced, this remains to be determined. There is no sequence similarity between *doxH* and *doxJ*, so it appears that they encode different enzymes that have similar functions.

Since *doxJ* may encode the equivalent of the protein encoded by *nahD*, this suggests that the DoxH protein is involved either in the conversion of 2-hydroxy-4-(2′-oxo-3,5-cyclohexadienyl)-buta-2,4-dienoate to cis-o-hydroxybenzylidenepyruvate or in the conversion of cis-o-hydroxybenzylidenepyruvate to 2-hydroxychromene-2-carboxylate (Fig. 4). Our Δ*doxH doxJ* mutant accumulated coumarin from naphthalene, but we did not detect the accumulation of cis- or trans-o-hydroxybenzylidenepyruvate, indicating that the pathway was blocked before these intermediates were formed. Coumarin may form spontaneously from any of the isomers of o-hydroxybenzylidenepyruvate (5). This suggests that *doxH* may be involved in the conversion of 2-hydroxy-4-(2′-oxo-3,5-cyclohexadienyl)-buta-2,4-dienoate to cis-o-hydroxybenzylidenepyruvate. This conclusion is not supported by the observations of Eaton and Chapman (10). They indicated that this conversion is attained spontaneously, and they could not detect any isomerase activity encoded between *nahC* and *nahE*. Yen and Gunsalus (47) did detect isomerase activity encoded between *nahC* and *nahE*, and our results with the Δ*doxHJ* double mutants indicate that a second isomerase does exist. Hopefully, further investigations will sort out these facts.

The DOX and NAH equivalents. The results of our assays and sequence analysis indicated many similarities between DOX and the upper naphthalene catabolic pathway (NAH). We believe that DOX encodes enzymes similar to those of

NAH. Using NAH as a guideline, we have used GC-FID–MS to establish enzymatic functions for many of the *dox* ORFs. Although we do not have direct enzymatic evidence for the function of each *dox* ORF, our assays and sequence comparisons enable us to suggest where each *dox* ORF may function in the naphthalene pathway. These assignments are indicated in Fig. 4: *doxABD* comprise the C18 equivalent of naphthalene dioxygenase (= *nahA*); *doxE* encodes *cis*-naphthalene dihydrodiol dehydrogenase (= *nahB*); *doxF* encodes salicylaldehyde dehydrogenase (= *nahF*); *doxG* encodes 1,2-dihydroxynaphthalene dioxygenase (= *nahC*); *doxH* may encode an enzyme (no *nah* equivalent) responsible for the conversion of 2-hydroxy-4-(2′-oxo-3,5-cyclohexadienyl)-buta-2,4-dienoate to *cis*-o-hydroxybenzylidenepyruvate; *doxI* encodes *trans-o*-hydroxybenzylidenepyruvate hydratase-aldolase (= *nahE*); and *doxJ* encodes an isomerase responsible for the conversion of 2-hydroxychromene-2-carboxylate to *trans-o*-hydroxybenzylidenepyruvate (= *nahD*). We have no evidence that *orfC* encodes a functional protein.

Is DOX a single operon? We have resisted referring to this set of ORFs as the DOX operon, since we have not done any Northern (RNA) analysis to confirm this. Nevertheless, the first six ORFs (*doxABDEFG*) appear to constitute a single operon that functions in both *P. putida* and *E. coli*. The largest interval between any of these ORFs is the 70 bp between *doxA* and *doxB*. The endogenous C18 promoter located 5′ to *doxA* was probably deleted when the 9.8-kb DNA fragment was subcloned to produce pSAD3EB-3, because DBT was not metabolized by *E. coli* CS109 unless the cloned genes were in the correct orientation to place them under control of the *E. coli lac* promoter supplied by the vector.

There are two obvious positions for additional promoters in the DNA sequence. The termination codon of *doxG* is approximately 250 bp upstream of the initiation codon of *doxH*. *doxI* and *doxJ* are similarly separated (Fig. 3). No fluorescent products were produced from DBT in *P. putida* KT2440 when *doxI* was mutated, although colored products were observed. Expression of the entire 9.8-kb fragment in *E. coli* results in the production of an orange, nonfluorescent product like that seen in *P. putida* when *doxI* is mutated, indicating that the pathway in *E. coli* stops before *doxI*. We know the pathway is functional in *E. coli* through *doxG* since the *E. coli doxG* mutants also accumulate the brown product (coumarin) (data not shown). The fact that the entire 9.8-kb fragment causes accumulation of an orange product in *E. coli*, and not the brown coumarin, indicates that *doxH* or *doxJ* must be active. There are numerous sequence motifs 5′ to *doxH* and *doxJ* that strongly resemble *Pseudomonas* promoter consensus sequences. These findings are consistent with the idea that *doxI* and either *doxH* or *doxJ* might be under the control of additional *Pseudomonas* promoters which are not recognized by *E. coli*, suggesting that they may constitute a separate operon.

Conclusions. The DOX genes encode a complete upper naphthalene catabolic pathway that is responsible for the conversion of naphthalene to salicylate. The DOX sequence represents the first complete DNA sequence for an upper naphthalene catabolic pathway. Recently, C18 was reported to be incapable of removing organically bound sulfur from DBT (45). This observation and our findings that the DBT-metabolizing genes from C18 encode an upper naphthalene catabolic pathway lead us to conclude that the ability of C18 to metabolize DBT is limited to oxidation of the aromatic ring in a manner similar to that described for the upper naphthalene catabolic pathway, NAH.

---

**ACKNOWLEDGMENTS**

We thank Steven Krawiec for supplying strain C18 and Roger M. Denome for critical review of the manuscript. This work was supported under contract DE-AC22-89PC89901 from the Department of Energy, Pittsburgh Energy Technology Center.

---

**ADDENDUM IN PROOF**

Since this paper was submitted, Simon et al. (Gene 127:31–37, 1993) reported the DNA sequence for four genes of the *nah* operon on the NAH7 plasmid. Three (*nahAb*, *nahAc*, and *nahAd*) were nearly identical with the *ndoABC* genes and therefore, by extension, with the *doxABD* genes reported in this work.

---

**REFERENCES**

1. Abriola, D. P., R. Fields, S. Stein, A. D. MacKerell, Jr., and R. Pietruszko. 1987. Active site of human liver aldehyde dehydrogenase. Biochemistry 26:5679–5684.
2. Bagdasarian, M., R. Lurz, B. Ruckert, F. C. H. Franklin, M. M. Bagdasarian, J. Frey, and K. N. Timmis. 1981. Specific-purpose plasmid cloning vectors. II. Broad host range, high copy number, RSF1010-derived vectors, and a host-vector system for gene cloning in *Pseudomonas*. Gene 16:237–247.
3. Braun, T., E. Bober, S. Singh, D. Agarwal, and H. W. Goedde. 1987. Isolation and sequence analysis of a full length cDNA clone coding for human mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase. Nucleic Acids Res. 15:3179.
4. Conseavage, M. W., R. D. Porter, and A. T. Phillips. 1985. Cloning and expression in *Escherichia coli* of histidine utilization genes from *Pseudomonas putida*. J. Bacteriol. 162:138–146.
5. Davies, J. I., and W. C. Evans. 1964. Oxidative metabolism of naphthalene by soil pseudomonads. The ring-fission mechanism. Biochem. J. 91:251–260.
6. Dayhoff, M. O., W. C. Barker, and L. T. Hunt. 1983. Establishing homologies in protein sequences. Methods Enzymol. 91:524–544.
7. Deretic, V., S. Chandrasekharappa, J. F. Gill, D. K. Chatterjee, and A. M. Chakrabarty. 1987. A set of cassettes and improved vectors for genetic and biochemical characterization of *Pseudomonas* genes. Gene 57:61–72.
8. DiLella, A. G., and S. L. C. Woo. 1987. Cloning large segments of genomic DNA using cosmid vectors. Methods Enzymol. 152:199–212.
9. Dunn, T. J., A. J. Koleske, R. Lindahl, and H. C. Pitot. 1989. Phenobarbitol-inducible aldehyde dehydrogenase in the rat. J. Biol. Chem. 264:13057–13065.
10. Eaton, R. W., and P. J. Chapman. 1992. Bacterial metabolism of naphthalene: construction and use of recombinant bacteria to study ring cleavage of 1,2-dihydroxynaphthalene and subsequent reactions. J. Bacteriol. 174:7542–7554.
11. Ensley, B. D., B. J. Ratzin, T. D. Osslund, M. J. Simon, L. P. Wackett, and D. T. Gibson. 1983. Expression of naphthalene oxidation genes in *Escherichia coli* results in the biosynthesis of indigo. Science 222:167–169.
12. Erickson, B. D., and F. J. Mondello. 1992. Nucleotide sequencing and transcriptional mapping of the genes encoding biphenyl dioxygenase, a multicomponent polychlorinated biphenyl-degrading enzyme in *Pseudomonas* strain LB400. J. Bacteriol. 174:2903–2912.
13. Evans, W. C., H. N. Fernley, and E. Griffiths. 1965. Oxidative metabolism of phenanthrene and anthracene by soil pseudomonads. Biochem. J. 95:819–831.
14. Farres, J., K.-L. Guan, and H. Weiner. 1989. Primary structures of rat and bovine liver mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenases deduced from cDNA sequences. Eur. J. Biochem. 180:67–74.
15. Feinberg, A. P., and B. Vogelstein. 1984. A technique for radiolabelling DNA restriction endonuclease fragments to high specific activity. Anal. Biochem. 137:266–267.
16. Foght, J. M., and D. W. S. Westlake. 1990. Expression of dibenzothiophene-degradative genes in two *Pseudomonas* species. Can. J. Microbiol. 36:718–724.
17. Frischauf, A.-M. 1987. Digestion of DNA: size fractionation.

Methods Enzymol. 152:183–189.

18. Furukawa, K., N. Arimara, and T. Miyazaki. 1987. Nucleotide sequence of the 2,3-dihydroxybiphenyl dioxygenase gene of *Pseudomonas pseudoalcaligenes*. J. Bacteriol. 169:427–429.

19. Giurard, B. M., and E. E. Snell. 1981. Biochemical factors in growth, p. 79–111. *In* P. Gerhardt, R. G. E. Murray, R. N. Costilow, E. W. Nester, W. A. Wood, N. R. Krieg, and G. B. Phillips (ed.), Manual of methods for general bacteriology. American Society for Microbiology, Washington, D.C.

20. Harayama, S., and M. Rekik. 1989. Bacterial aromatic ring-cleavage enzymes are classified into two different gene families. J. Biol. Chem. 264:15328–15333.

21. Heim, R., and E. E. Strehler. 1991. Cloning an *Escherichia coli* gene encoding a protein remarkably similar to mammalian aldehyde dehydrogenases. Gene 99:15–23.

22. Hempel, J., R. Kaiser, and H. Jornvall. 1985. Mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase from human liver. Primary structure, differences in relation to the cytosolic enzyme, and functional correlations. Eur. J. Biochem. 153:13–28.

23. Hempel, J., H. von Bahr-Lindstrom, and H. Jornvall. 1984. Aldehyde dehydrogenase from human liver. Primary structure of the cytoplasmic isoenzyme. Eur. J. Biochem. 141:21–35.

24. Henikoff, S. 1984. Unidirectional digestion with exonuclease III creates targeted breakpoints for DNA sequencing. Gene 28:351–359.

25. Holmes, D. S., and M. Quigley. 1981. A rapid boiling method for the preparation of bacterial plasmids. Anal. Biochem. 114:193–197.

26. Horn, J. M., S. Harayama, and K. N. Timmis. 1991. DNA sequence determination of the TOL plasmid (pWWO) *xylGFJ* genes of *Pseudomonas putida*: implications for the evolution of aromatic catabolism. Mol. Microbiol. 5:2459–2474.

27. Irie, S., S. Doi, T. Yorifuji, M. Takagi, and K. Yano. 1987. Nucleotide sequencing and characterization of the genes encoding benzene oxidation enzymes of *Pseudomonas putida*. J. Bacteriol. 169:5174–5179.

28. Ish-Horowitz, D., and J. F. Burke. 1981. Rapid and efficient cosmid cloning. Nucleic Acids Res. 9:2989–2998.

29. Johansson, J., H. von Bahr-Lindstrom, R. Jeck, C. Woenckhaus, and H. Jornvall. 1988. Mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase from horse liver. Correlations of the same species variants for both cytosolic and mitochondrial forms of an enzyme. Eur. J. Biochem. 172:527–533.

30. Keen, N. T., S. Tamaki, D. Kobayashi, and D. Trollinger. 1988. Improved broad-host-range plasmids for DNA cloning in Gram-negative bacteria. Gene 70:191–197.

31. Kiyohara, H., K. Nagao, and K. Yana. 1982. Rapid screen for bacteria degrading water-insoluble, solid hydrocarbons on agar plates. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 43:454–457.

32. Kodama, K., K. Umehara, K. Shimizu, S. Makatani, Y. Minoda, and K. Yamada. 1973. Identification of microbial products for dibenzothiophene and its proposed oxidation pathway. Agric. Biol. Chem. 37:45–50.

33. Kok, M., R. Oldenhuis, M. P. G. van der Linden, C. H. C. Meulenberg, J. Kingma, and B. Witholt. 1989. The *Pseudomonas oleovorans alkBAC* operon encodes two structurally related rubre-

doxins and an aldehyde dehydrogenase. J. Biol. Chem. 264:5442–5451.

34. Krawiec, S. 1990. Bacterial desulfurization of thiophenes: screening techniques and some speculations regarding the biochemical and genetic basis. Dev. Ind. Microbiol. 31:103–113.

35. Kurkela, S., H. Lehvaslaiho, E. T. Palva, and T. H. Teeri. 1991. Cloning, nucleotide sequence and characterization of genes encoding naphthalene dioxygenase of *Pseudomonas putida* strain NCIB9816. Gene 73:355–362.

36. Lipman, D. J., and W. R. Pearson. 1985. Rapid and sensitive protein similarity searches. Science 227:1435–1441.

37. Maniatis, T., E. F. Fritsch, and J. Sambrook. 1982. Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.

38. Neidle, E. L., C. Hartnett, L. N. Ornston, A. Bairoch, M. Rekik, and S. Harayama. 1991. Nucleotide sequences of the *Acinetobacter calcoaceticus benABC* genes for benzoate 1,2-dioxygenase reveal evolutionary relationships among oxygenases. J. Bacteriol. 173:5385–5395.

39. Neidle, E., C. Hartnett, L. N. Ornston, A. Bairoch, M. Rekik, and S. Harayama. 1992. *cis*-diol dehydrogenases encoded by the TOL pWWO plasmid *xylL* gene and the *Acinetobacter calcoaceticus* chromosomal *benD* gene are members of the short-chain alcohol dehydrogenase superfamily. Eur. J. Biochem. 204:113–120.

40. Pickett, M., D. I. Gwynne, F. P. Buxton, R. Elliott, R. W. Davies, R. A. Lockington, C. Scazzocchio, and H. M. Sealy-Lewis. 1987. Cloning and characterization of the *aldA* gene of *Aspergillus nidulans*. Gene 51:217–226.

41. Sanger, F., S. Nicklen, and A. R. Coulson. 1977. DNA sequencing with chain-terminating inhibitors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 74:5463–5467.

42. Shine, J., and L. Dalgarno. 1975. Determinant of cistron specificity in bacterial ribosomes. Nature (London) 254:34–38.

43. Simon, R., U. Priefer, and A. Pühler. 1983. A broad host range mobilization system for *in vivo* genetic engineering: transposon mutagenesis in gram negative bacteria. Biotechnology 1:784–791.

44. Southern, E. M. 1975. Detection of specific sequences among DNA fragments separated by gel electrophoresis. J. Mol. Biol. 98:503–517.

45. Stoner, D. L., J. E. Wey, K. B. Barrett, J. G. Jolley, R. B. Wright, and P. R. Dugan. 1990. Modification of water-soluble coal-derived products by dibenzothiophene-degrading microorganisms. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 56:2667–2676.

46. Taira, K., N. Hayase, N. Arimura, S. Yamasahita, T. Miyazaki, and K. Furukawa. 1988. Cloning and nucleotide sequence of the 2,3-dihydroxybiphenyl dioxygenase gene from the PCB-degrading strain of *Pseudomonas paucimobilis* Q1. Biochemistry 27:3990–3996.

47. Yen, K.-M., and I. C. Gunsalus. 1982. Plasmid gene organization: naphthalene/salicylate oxidation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 79:874–878.

48. Yen, K.-M., and C. M. Serdar. 1988. Genetics of naphthalene catabolism in pseudomonads. Crit. Rev. Microbiol. 15:247–268.

49. Zylstra, G. J., and D. T. Gibson. 1989. Toluene degradation by *Pseudomonas putida* F1. J. Biol. Chem. 264:14940–14946.
