
JOURNAL OF BACTERIOLOGY, Mar. 1996, p. 1351–1362
0021-9193/96/$04.00+0
Copyright © 1996, American Society for Microbiology

# $p$-Cumate Catabolic Pathway in *Pseudomonas putida* F1: Cloning and Characterization of DNA Carrying the *cmt* Operon†

**RICHARD W. EATON***

Gulf Ecology Division, National Health and Environmental Effects Research Laboratory,
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Gulf Breeze, Florida 32561

Received 20 October 1995/Accepted 15 December 1995

*Pseudomonas putida* F1 utilizes $p$-cumate ($p$-isopropylbenzoate) as a growth substrate by means of an eight-step catabolic pathway. A 35.75-kb DNA segment, within which the *cmt* operon encoding the catabolism of $p$-cumate is located, was cloned as four separate overlapping restriction fragments and mapped with restriction endonucleases. By examining enzyme activities in recombinant bacteria carrying these fragments and subcloned fragments, genes encoding most of the enzymes of the $p$-cumate pathway were located. Subsequent sequence analysis of 11,260 bp gave precise locations of the 12 genes of the *cmt* operon. The first three genes, *cmtAaAbAc*, and the sixth gene, *cmtAd*, encode the components of $p$-cumate 2,3-dioxygenase (ferredoxin reductase, large subunit of the terminal dioxygenase, small subunit of the terminal dioxygenase, and ferredoxin, respectively); these genes are separated by *cmtC*, which encodes 2,3-dihydroxy-$p$-cumate 3,4-dioxygenase, and *cmtB*, coding for 2,3-dihydroxy-2,3-dihydro-$p$-cumate dehydrogenase. The ring cleavage product, 2-hydroxy-3-carboxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate, is acted on by a decarboxylase encoded by the seventh gene, *cmtD*, which is followed by a large open reading frame, *cmtI*, of unknown function. The next four genes, *cmtEFHG*, encode 2-hydroxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate hydrolase, 2-hydroxypenta-2,4-dienoate hydratase, 4-hydroxy-2-oxovalerate aldolase, and acetaldehyde dehydrogenase, respectively, which transform the decarboxylation product to amphibolic intermediates. The deduced amino acid sequences of all the *cmt* gene products except CmtD and CmtI have a recognizable but low level of identity with amino acid sequences of enzymes catalyzing analogous reactions in other catabolic pathways. This identity is highest for the last two enzymes of the pathway (4-hydroxy-2-oxovalerate aldolase and acetaldehyde dehydrogenase [acylating]), which have identities of 66 to 77% with the corresponding enzymes from other aromatic *meta*-cleavage pathways. Recombinant bacteria carrying certain restriction fragments bordering the *cmt* operon were found to transform indole to indigo. This reaction, known to be catalyzed by toluene 2,3-dioxygenase, led to the discovery that the *tod* operon, encoding the catabolism of toluene, is located 2.8 kb downstream from and in the same orientation as the *cmt* operon in *P. putida* F1.

---

Aromatic hydrocarbons and various alkyl-substituted homologs are found in fossil fuels such as petroleum and coal and their derivatives (74). They also occur as natural products; for example, $p$-cymene ($p$-isopropyltoluene) has been identified in volatile oils from about 100 plants, including eucalyptus, cumin, thyme, cypress, coriander, sage, star anise, and cinnamon, often as the major component (36).

Catabolism of the simplest alkyl-substituted aromatic compound, toluene, has been studied extensively in *Pseudomonas putida* F1 (33, 35). In this strain, toluene catabolism is initiated by a reductive dioxygenase which adds a molecule of oxygen and two hydrogen atoms to the aromatic ring to form (+)-cis-1(S), 2(R)-dihydroxy-3-methylcyclohexa-3,5-diene (2,3-dihydroxy-2,3-dihydrotoluene, or cis-toluene dihydrol) (33, 100).

*P. putida* F1 also grows with $p$-cymene, but in this instance the catabolic pathway is initiated by oxidation of the methyl group to yield $p$-cumate ($p$-isopropylbenzoate) (8). Similar methyl group oxidations to the corresponding acid have been shown to occur in the metabolism of $p$-cymene by other organisms (13, 16, 55, 57, 58, 97) and of other methyl-substituted aromatic hydrocarbons, including toluene, xylenes (3), methylnaphthalenes (75), and dimethylnaphthalenes (6, 63, 75), and other compounds such as $p$-cresol (11). A mechanism for methyl group oxidation has been suggested for the strain in which $p$-cymene degradation was first described, *P. putida* PL

(16, 57, 58), and for bacteria such as *P. putida* mt-2 which metabolize toluene, $m$-xylene, and $p$-xylene by a TOL plasmid-encoded pathway (3, 84). There, initial oxidation is catalyzed by a monooxygenase to form a benzyl alcohol which then undergoes successive NAD⁺-dependent enzyme-catalyzed dehydrogenations to form first an aldehyde and then an acid.

A pathway (Fig. 1) for the further catabolism of $p$-cumate by *P. putida* PL has been proposed (15–17). The pathway is initiated by a reductive dioxygenase (Fig. 1, enzyme A), which catalyzes the addition of a molecule of oxygen and two hydrogen atoms to $p$-cumate, producing cis-2,3-dihydroxy-2,3-dihydro-$p$-cumate (Fig. 1, compound II); the dihydrodiol is subsequently dehydrogenated (Fig. 1, enzyme B) to 2,3-dihydroxy-$p$-cumate (Fig. 1, compound III). This is acted on by a ring-cleavage dioxygenase (Fig. 1, enzyme C), yielding 2-hydroxy-3-carboxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate (Fig. 1, compound IV). A decarboxylase (Fig. 1, enzyme D) converts the ring-cleavage product to 2-hydroxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate (Fig. 1, compound V), which is then transformed by a series of enzymes: a hydrolase (enzyme E), producing isobutyrate (compound VII); a hydratase (enzyme F); and an aldolase (enzyme G), yielding pyruvate (compound X) and acetaldehyde (compound IX). Recent work (72, 83) suggests that, in this and other *meta*-cleavage pathways, a dehydrogenase (enzyme H) converts acetaldehyde to acetyl-coenzyme A as a final step.

Although this pathway has received less attention than have other pathways for the catabolism of methyl-substituted aromatic compounds, notably the toluene catabolic pathway of *P. putida* F1 (31, 34, 35, 102) and the TOL plasmid-encoded pathway for the catabolism of $m$- and $p$-xylenes (3), bacteria that

* Corresponding author. Phone: (904) 934-9345. Fax: (904) 934-9201. Electronic mail address: reaton@gulfbr.gbr.epa.gov.
† Contribution 941 from the Gulf Ecology Division, NHEERL, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Gulf Breeze, Fla.

2,3-Dihydroxy-2,3-dihydro-$p$-cumate was prepared initially by incubating dihydrodiol dehydrogenase-deficient mutant strain *P. putida* PL-pT11/43 with $p$-cumate; subsequently, the recombinant strain *P. aeruginosa* PAO1(pRE822) was employed. The dihydrodiols produced by these two strains have been shown to be identical (81). Similarly, 2-hydroxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate was prepared either by the transformation of isopropylbenzene by using mutant strain *P. putida* RE225 or of $p$-cumate by using recombinant strain *P. aeruginosa* PAO1(pRE634). Following removal of cells by centrifugation, diluted supernatants containing either of the above reaction products were used in enzyme assays. 2-Hydroxypenta-2,4-dienoate was prepared from allylglycine by the method of Collingsworth et al. (9). Restriction endonucleases and T4 DNA ligase were obtained from New England BioLabs, Beverly, Mass., and used according to the manufacturer’s instructions; 1-kb DNA ladder size standards were from Bethesda Research Laboratories, Gaithersburg, Md. Other chemicals and reagents were of the highest purity commercially available.

Preparation, analysis, and cloning of DNA. DNA isolation and cloning and analyses of clones were carried out as previously described (24). Recombinant bacteria were identified as follows. Bacteria carrying $p$-cumate dioxygenase genes converted indole-2-carboxylate to indigo (23) and appeared as blue colonies on selective medium containing 0.5 mM indole-2-carboxylate. Bacteria carrying tolune dioxygenase genes converted indole to indigo (28) and appeared as blue colonies on selective medium containing 1 mM indole. Bacteria carrying DNA fragments that overlap previously cloned fragments were identified in colony hybridization experiments (38) by using gel-purified (19) ${}^{32}$P-labeled DNA fragments as probes. *E. coli* JM109 carrying different DNA fragments inserted into the multiple cloning site within the *lacZa* gene of the plasmid vector (pUCBM20, pUCBM21, or pBluescriptII KS) formed white colonies on selective medium containing IPTG (0.25 mM) and X-Gal (0.02%).

Cultivation of organisms. To cultivate bacteria for chemical transformations or preparation of extracts, a 10- to 20-ml overnight culture of a recombinant strain in LB medium, supplemented with 100 μg of ampicillin or 30 μg of chloramphenicol per ml, was used to inoculate 500 ml of the same medium. After 2 h of incubation at $30^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$, IPTG was added to 1 mM, and the incubation was continued for 3 h. Cells were harvested by centrifugation, washed in 50 mM sodium-potassium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0, and resuspended in about 5 ml of the same buffer.

Preparation of cell extracts. Cell extracts were prepared by passing cell suspensions twice through a French pressure cell (SLM Instruments, Inc., Urbana, Ill.) at 14,000 to 20,000 lb/in${}^{2}$. Most particulates were removed by centrifugation at $47,800 \times g$ for 40 min at $4^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$. When assays of NADH production or consumption were to be carried out, membrane-associated NADH oxidase was removed by further centrifugation of extracts at $100,000 \times g$ for 2 h at $4^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$.

Analysis of enzymes produced by recombinant bacteria. UV-visible spectra were recorded with a Perkin-Elmer Lambda 6 spectrophotometer and prepared for publication by using CorelDRAW! (Corel Corp., Ottawa, Ontario, Canada). The absorbance maxima of 2,3-dihydroxy-2,3-dihydro-$p$-cumate (293 nm), 2-hydroxy-3-carboxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate (346 nm), and 2-hydroxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate (323 and 393 nm) have been described previously (16, 17, 26). 2-Hydroxypenta-2,4-dienoate hydratase and acetaldehyde dehydrogenase (acylating) assays were carried out as described by Collingsworth et al. (9) and Shingler et al. (83), respectively. Protein concentrations were determined by using the bicinchoninic acid protein assay reagent (Pierce, Rockford, Ill.), with bovine serum albumin as the standard.

DNA sequence determination. Plasmids pRE774 and pRE770 were the sources of DNA fragments for subcloning and sequencing. Both strands of a DNA segment of 11,260 bp were sequenced by the dideoxy chain termination method with double-stranded DNA as the template (80). Sequencing reactions were initiated with vector-complementary primers and by using newly synthesized primers whose sequences were chosen based on previous sequence data. Most sequence determinations were carried out by National Biosciences, Inc., Plymouth, Minn. Some sequencing reactions and analyses were carried out by the ICBR DNA Sequencing Core Laboratory, University of Florida, Gainesville, using an Applied Biosystems, Inc., model 373a sequencer as previously described (20). Sequence data were aligned and edited by using DNASTAR (DNASTAR, Inc., Madison, Wis.). Searches for specific nucleotide or amino acid sequences in the GenBank database were carried out with the BLAST program (2). Sequences were retrieved from GenBank and compared with sequences obtained here by using DNASTar COMPARE, ALIGN, and AALIGN programs (67, 95).

Nucleotide sequence accession number. The DNA sequence obtained in this study is available from GenBank (accession number U24215).

**RESULTS**

Cloning $p$-cumate catabolic genes. Cells of *P. putida* F1 grown with $p$-cumate transform indole-2-carboxylate to the water-insoluble blue dye indigo and related compounds by using $p$-cumate 2,3-dioxygenase (23). This chromogenic transformation was employed to identify recombinant bacteria [*E. coli* JM109(pRE611)] carrying the genes encoding $p$-cumate 2,3-dioxygenase; these bacteria appeared as blue colonies among colorless colonies on LB agar plates supplemented with indole-2-carboxylate and chloramphenicol (23). The plasmid

FIG. 1. Pathway for the catabolism of $p$-cumate. Chemicals are: I, $p$-cumate; II, cis-2,3-dihydroxy-2,3-dihydro-$p$-cumate; III, 2,3-dihydroxy-$p$-cumate; IV, 2-hydroxy-3-carboxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate; V, 2-hydroxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate; VI, 2-hydroxypenta-2,4-dienoate; VII, isobutyrate; VIII, 2-oxo-4-hydroxyvalerate; IX, acetaldehyde; X, pyruvate; and XI, acetyl-coenzyme A (CoA). Enzymes are: A, $p$-cumate 2,3-dioxygenase; B, 2,3-dihydroxy-2,3-dihydro-$p$-cumate dehydrogenase; C, 2,3-dihydroxy-$p$-cumate dioxygenase; D, 2-hydroxy-3-carboxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate decarboxylase; E, 2-hydroxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate hydrolase; F, 2-hydroxypenta-2,4-dienoate hydratase; G, 2-oxo-4-hydroxyvalerate aldolase; H, acetaldehyde dehydrogenase (acylating) (15–17, 72, 83, 87).

use the $p$-cymene/$p$-cumate pathway are widespread; this may be the predominant pathway for the degradation of para-alkyl-substituted toluenes and benzoates. Thus, when Wigmore et al. (94) carried out selective enrichments with para-substituted toluenes or benzoates other than $p$-xylene or $p$-toluate as the sole carbon and energy sources, they invariably isolated bacteria employing a $p$-cumate-type pathway. The enzymes of the pathway have a broad specificity and act on a variety of para- and 3,4-substituted toluenes and benzoates (8, 16).

The broad substrate specificity of $p$-cymene/$p$-cumate pathway enzymes extends to indole-2-carboxylate and indole-3-carboxylate, both of which are metabolized to the water-insoluble dye indigo and related products by *P. putida* F1 (23). This chromogenic transformation allowed the cloning of DNA encoding the responsible enzyme, $p$-cumate 2,3-dioxygenase, and other enzymes of the pathway (23) and led to the studies of the genetic basis for $p$-cumate catabolism in *P. putida* F1 described here.

**MATERIALS AND METHODS**

Bacterial strains and plasmids. The plasmids and bacterial strains used in this study are listed in Table 1. *P. putida* F1 was originally isolated by using ethylbenzene as the sole carbon and energy source (34). This strain has been used in extensive studies of the genes (*tod*) and enzymes involved in toluene degradation (35, 99, 101, 102) and also grows with $p$-cymene and $p$-cumate (23). Strain BPC${}^{+}$-10-2 was derived by P. Chapman and P. Webster from strain F1 in two steps. First, selection for growth on the noninducing substrate biphenyl-4-carboxylate yielded the constitutive strain F1-BPC${}^{+}$. Second, selection of mutants of strain F1-BPC${}^{+}$ in a medium containing $p$-iodobenzoate (93) gave the 2,3-dihydroxy-$p$-cumate dioxygenase-deficient mutant strain F1-BPC${}^{+}$-10-2. *Escherichia coli* JM109 (98) was routinely used as the host in cloning experiments, while *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* PAO1 (78) was also used as a host for recombinant plasmids in some experiments.

Media. Luria-Bertani medium (LB) (14) was used for the cultivation of bacteria except where noted. Minimal medium was R medium (25) containing 20 mM sodium lactate. Media were solidified with 1.5% Bacto agar (Difco Laboratories, Detroit, Mich.).

Chemicals and enzymes. $p$-Cymene and $p$-cumic acid were obtained from Aldrich Chemical Co., Milwaukee, Wis.; indole-2-carboxylic acid was from Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, Mo.; and isopropyl-$\beta$-D-thiogalactoside (IPTG) and 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indoly-$\beta$-D-galactopyranoside (X-Gal) were from Gold Biotechnology, St. Louis, Mo.; 2,3-Dihydroxy-$p$-cumic acid was prepared by incubation of mutant strain F1-BPC${}^{+}$-10-2 with $p$-cumate. Following incubation, cells were removed, and the supernatant was acidified and extracted with ethyl acetate, which was subsequently dried over sodium sulfate and removed under vacuum. The product was recrystallized from water. Its identity was confirmed by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis of its tri-trimethylsilyl derivative, as previously described (22); the mass spectrum had a molecular ion, $\mathrm{M}^{+}$, of $m / z$ 412 (0.2% abundance), with a base peak, $[\mathrm{M}-\mathrm{CH}_{3}]^{+}$, of $m / z$ 397.

VOL. 178, 1996

$p$-CUMATE CATABOLISM BY $P$. PUTIDA F1 1353

TABLE 1. Bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study

| Strain or plasmid | Description | Reference(s) |
|-------------------|-------------|---------------|
| Strains           |             |               |
| $P.putida$ F1     | Grows with toluene, $p$-cymene, and $p$-cumate | 23, 34, 101 |
| $P.putida$ F1BPC${}^{+}$-10-2 | Mutant derivative of $P.putida$ F1; constitutive, accumulates 2,3-dihydroxy-$p$-cumate from $p$-cumate | 8 |
| $E.coli$ JM 109   | $recAendA1gyrA96thihsdR17supE44relA1\Delta(lac-proAB)$ ($F'traD36proABlacI^qZ\Delta M15$) | 98 |
| $P.aeruginosa$ PAO1 |             | 78            |
| $P.putida$ PLpT-11/43 | Mutant derivative of $p$-cymene-degrading $P.putida$ PL, constitutive, accumulates 2,3-dihydroxy-2,3-dihydro-$p$-cumate from $p$-cumate | 16 |
| $P.putida$ RE 225 | Tn5 mutant derivative of isopropylbenzene-degrading $P.putida$ RE 204; accumulates 2-hydroxy-6-oxo-7-methyl-octa-2,4-dienoate from isopropylbenzene | 26 |
| Plasmids          |             |               |
| pLV 59            | Encodes $EcoRI$ restriction endonuclease and temperature-sensitive $EcoRI$ methylase, $Cm^r$, positive-selection cloning vector | 71 |
| pRK404            | Derived from RK2, multiple cloning site, $Tc^r$ | 18 |
| pMMB 277          | $Cm^rMob^+$, derived from RSF 1010 (39), $lacI^q$, multiple cloning site in $lacZa$ downstream from $Ptac$ | 65 |
| pRK2013           | $Km^r$, helper plasmid for mobilization | 18 |
| pUCBM 20          | Derived from pUC 18 with the following additional cloning sites inserted into $lacZa$: $NcoI$, $EcoRV$, $ApaI$, $SacII$, $XmaIII$, $NotI$, $BfrI$, $MluI$; $Ap^r$, obtained from Boehringer-Mannheim | 98 |
| pUCBM 21          | Identical to pUCBM 20 but with the multiple cloning site reversed | 98 |
| pBluescriptII KS  | $Ap^r$, multiple cloning site in $lacZa$; obtained from Stratagene Cloning Systems | 1 |
| pRE611            | 7.4-kb $HindIII$ fragment (map coordinates 6.25 to 13.65) from $P.putida$ F1 inserted into pLV 59; $Ind^+Cm^r$ | 23 |
| pRE626            | 7.4-kb $HindIII$ fragment from pRE611 inserted into pRK404; $Ind^+Tc^r$ | This study |
| pRE634            | 7.4-kb $HindIII$ fragment from pRE626 inserted into pMMB 277; $Ind^+Cm^r$ | This study |
| pRE646            | pRE634 digested with $ClaI$ (sites at map coordinates 9.8 and 11) and religated; $Ind^-Cm^r$ | This study |
| pRE665            | pRE611 digested with $SmaI$ and $HpaI$ (sites at map coordinates 11 and 13.5, respectively) and religated; $Ind^-Cm^r$ | This study |
| pRE702            | pRE634 digested with $EcoRI$ (sites in vector and at map coordinate 8.8) and religated; $Ind^-Cm^r$ | This study |
| pRE703            | 4.9-kb $HindIII$ fragment from pRE665 inserted into pMMB 277; $Ind^-Cm^r$ | This study |
| pRE708            | 3.05-kb $BglII$ fragment (map coordinates 8.9 to 11.95) from $P.putida$ F1 inserted into pLV 59, hybridized to 7.4-kb $HindIII$ fragment from pRE634; $Ind^-Cm^r$ | This study |
| pRE764            | 8.15-kb $BglII$ fragment (map coordinates 0 to 8.15) from $P.putida$ F1 inserted into pLV 59, hybridized to $HindIII$ fragment from pRE634; $Cm^r$ | This study |
| pRE765            | 14.45-kb $BglII$ fragment (map coordinates 11.95 to 26.4) from $P.putida$ F1 inserted into pLV 59, hybridized to 7.4-kb $HindIII$ fragment from pRE634; $Cm^r$ | This study |
| pRE768            | 2.8-kb $NcoI$ fragment (map coordinates 12.55 to 15.35) from pRE764 inserted into pUCBM 21; $Ap^r$ | This study |
| pRE770            | 14.45-kb $BglII$ fragment (map coordinates 11.95 to 26.4) from pRE765 inserted into $BamHI$-digested pUCBM 20; $Ap^r$ | This study |
| pRE771            | 3.1-kb $SalI$ fragment (map coordinates 13.65 to 16.75) from pRE765 inserted into pUCBM 20; $Ap^r$ | This study |
| pRE773            | 2.95-kb $SalI$ fragment (map coordinates 16.75 to 19.7) from pRE765 inserted into pUCBM 20; $Ap^r$ | This study |
| pRE774            | 7.4-kb $HindIII$ fragment from pRE634 inserted into pUCBM 21; $Ind^+Ap^r$ | This study |
| pRE804            | pRE774 digested with $BstBI$ (sites at map coordinates 10.3 and 10.4) and religated; $Ind^+Ap^r$ | This study |
| pRE805            | pRE611 digested with $XmaI$ (map coordinate 11), ends filled and religated; $Ind^+Cm^r$ | This study |
| pRE821            | 7.3-kb $HindIII$ fragment from pRE804 inserted into pMMB 277; $Ind^+Cm^r$ | This study |
| pRE822            | 7.4-kb $HindIII$ fragment from pRE805 inserted into pMMB 277; $Ind^+Cm^r$ | This study |
| pRE823            | 4.55-kb $NcoI$ fragment (map coordinates 15.35 to 19.9) from pRE765 inserted into pUCBM 21; $Ap^r$ | This study |
| pRE834            | 11.35-kb $HindIII$ fragment from $P.putida$ F1 (map coordinates 24.4 to 35.75) inserted into pLV 59, hybridized to the 2-kb $HindIII-BglII$ fragment (coordinates 24.4 to 26.4) from pRE765; $Cm^r$ | This study |
| pRE843            | pRE770 digested with $SalI$ (sites at map coordinates 12.95 and in the vector) and religated; $Ap^r$ | This study |
| pRE848            | 1.2-kb $ClaI$ fragment (map coordinates 9.8 to 11) from pRE634 inserted into pBluescriptII KS; $Ap^r$ | This study |
| pRE850            | 2.9-kb $XhoI-HindIII$ (map coordinates 21.5 to 24.4) fragment from pRE765 and 5.3-kb $HindIII-ClaI$ fragment (coordinates 24.5 to 29.8) from pRE834 inserted into $XhoI-ClaI$-digested pBluescriptII KS; $Ind^{+a}Ap^r$ | This study |

${}^a$ Ind${}^+$, able to convert indole to indigo.

obtained in the initial cloning experiment, pRE611, carries a 7.4-kb $HindIII$ fragment from the chromosome of strain F1 inserted in the cloning vector pLV 59 and encodes the transformation of $p$-cumate through four steps to 2-hydroxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate (23). A restriction endonuclease cleavage map of the inserted DNA fragment was generated (Fig. 2, map coordinates 6.25 to 13.65). This map suggested different strategies for obtaining recombinant plasmids encoding fewer or individual enzymes of the pathway by deletion and/or subcloning, as well as for obtaining plasmids encoding the remaining enzymes of the $p$-cumate pathway (Table 1 and Fig. 2). Bacteria carrying plasmids (pRE764 and pRE765) containing $BglII$ fragments from the chromosome of strain F1 that overlap the original 7.4-kb $HindIII$ fragment were identified by colony hybridization with the $HindIII$ fragment as the probe. Identification of the enzyme activities specified by these clones and subclones derived from them is described below.

Location of $p$-cumate catabolic pathway genes on recombinant plasmids. Transformations of $p$-cumate and pathway intermediates by cells and cell extracts were evaluated by UV-visible spectrophotometry as described in more detail below. Bacteria carrying the 7.4-kb $HindIII$ fragment in pRE611 (or its derivative, pRE634) converted $p$-cumate to 2-hydroxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate ($\lambda_{max}$, 323 and 393 nm) (Fig. 1, compound V). However, bacteria carrying plasmids generated by the deletion of part of pRE611 or pRE634 (pRE702, pRE646, and pRE703) failed to transform $p$-cumate (or indole-2-carboxylate to indigo). All of these plasmids therefore lack at least one gene encoding $p$-cumate dioxygenase (Fig. 1, enzyme A).

These plasmids encode other enzymes of the $p$-cumate catabolic pathway. Cell extracts of $E.coli$ JM109(pRE702) converted 2,3-dihydroxy-2,3-dihydro-$p$-cumate (cumate diol) (Fig. 1, compound II) to 2-hydroxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate (Fig. 1, compound V), while cell extracts of strain

FIG. 2. DNA from *P. putida* F1 encoding the metabolism of p-cumate: restriction map of a 35.75-kb DNA segment. The locations of the genes encoding pathway enzymes (see legend to Fig. 1) are indicated at the top. Below the map are shown DNA fragments that have been cloned or subcloned or deletions that have been obtained. The names of the plasmids containing these fragments are indicated at the left.

FIG. 3. Transformation of $p$-cumate to 2,3-dihydroxy-2,3-dihydro-$p$-cumate by *P. aeruginosa* PAO1(pRE822). Washed, IPTG-induced cells (see Materials and Methods) resuspended in minimal medium were added to the same medium to give an OD$_{600}$ of 7.2 in a 30-ml total volume containing 2.5 mM $p$-cumate and 0.2% lactate. The mixture, in a 300-ml Erlenmeyer flask, was incubated with shaking at 30°C. Samples were taken immediately after addition of cells and at 30-min intervals for 5.5 h; cells were removed by centrifugation, and the spectra of supernatants diluted 50-fold in 50 mM potassium-sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7, were recorded. Up and down arrows indicate increasing and decreasing absorbances, respectively.

JM109(pRE708) transformed 2,3-dihydroxy-2,3-dihydro-$p$-cumate only as far as 2-hydroxy-3-carboxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate (Fig. 1, compound IV). Although cell extracts of JM109(pRE703) failed to attack 2,3-dihydroxy-2,3-dihydro-$p$-

FIG. 5. Conversion of 2,3-dihydroxy-$p$-cumate to 2-hydroxy-3-carboxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate by extracts of *E. coli* JM109(pRE848) at 30°C. The sample and reference cuvettes contained 50 mM potassium-sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.0). The sample cuvette also contained 25 nmol of 2,3-dihydroxy-$p$-cumate. Spectra were recorded before the addition of 5 μl of extract containing 5 μg of protein to both cuvettes and after 0.17, 3, 6, 9, 12, and 15 min. Up and down arrows indicate increasing and decreasing absorbances, respectively.

cumate, they transformed 2,3-dihydroxy-$p$-cumate (Fig. 1, compound III) to 2-hydroxy-3-carboxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate, the only pathway intermediate acted on by extracts of JM109(pRE646), which catalyzed its conversion to 2-hydroxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate.

FIG. 4. Conversion of 2,3-dihydroxy-2,3-dihydro-$p$-cumate to 2,3-dihydroxy-$p$-cumate by extracts of *E. coli* JM109(pRE821) at 30°C. The sample and reference cuvettes contained 50 mM potassium-sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.0) and 3 nmol of NAD$^+$ in 1-ml volumes. The sample cuvette also contained 75 nmol of 2,3-dihydroxy-2,3-dihydro-$p$-cumate. Spectra were recorded before the addition of 2 μl of extract containing 45 μg of protein to both cuvettes and after 0.17, 2.5, 5, 7.5, 10, 12.5, 15, and 17.5 min. Up and down arrows indicate increasing and decreasing absorbances, respectively.

FIG. 6. Conversion of 2-hydroxy-3-carboxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate to 2-hydroxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate by extracts of *E. coli* JM109 (pRE843) at 30°C. Cuvette contents were those at the end of the reaction shown in Fig. 5. Spectra were recorded before the addition of 5 μl of extract containing 6 μg of protein to both cuvettes and after 0.17, 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, 21, and 24 min. Up and down arrows indicate increasing and decreasing absorbances, respectively.

fragment (map coordinates 11.95 to 26.4) in pRE765 or pRE770 converted 2-hydroxy-3-carboxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate to UV-nonabsorbing products. The decarboxylase gene, *cmtD*, is therefore located between the *BglII* site at map coordinate 11.95 and the *HindIII* site at coordinate 13.65. Plasmid pRE843, containing only a 1-kb *BglII-SalI* fragment, was constructed by digesting pRE770 with *SalI* (sites at coordinate 12.95 and in the vector) and religating. Cell extracts of *E. coli* JM109(pRE843) converted 2-hydroxy-3-carboxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate to 2-hydroxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate (Fig. 6). Extracts of JM109 (pRE770) then converted the product through 2-hydroxypenta-2,4-dienoate (*λ*<sub>max</sub>, 265 nm) to UV-nonabsorbing products (Fig. 7).

2-Hydroxy-3-carboxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate is a β-keto acid; as a result, its decarboxylation also occurs spontaneously at a low rate (about 0.5 to 1.0% min<sup>-1</sup> for a 25 μM solution at 30°C) in the absence of the decarboxylase enzyme.

Other pathway enzymes were detectable in extracts of bacteria containing some of these plasmids. *E. coli*(pRE770) extracts centrifuged at 100,000 × g to remove NADH oxidase contained acetaldehyde dehydrogenase (acylating) activity (60 nmol min<sup>-1</sup> [mg of protein]<sup>-1</sup>) as well as 2-hydroxypenta-2,4-dienoate hydratase activity (at least 500 nmol min<sup>-1</sup>[mg of protein]<sup>-1</sup>). Spontaneous isomerization of the substrate (59) prevents accurate determination of rates of activity for the latter enzyme.

The fact that neither pRE702 nor pRE703 appears to specify an active *p*-cumate 2,3-dioxygenase suggests that the genes encoding *p*-cumate 2,3-dioxygenase are probably not contiguous but are located to the left and right of *cmtB* and *cmtC*, a conclusion supported by the DNA sequence (below).

Nucleotide sequence of the *p*-cumate catabolism operon. The sequence of both strands of an 11,260-bp DNA segment that carries the *cmt* operon was obtained. It extends from the *HindIII* site at map coordinate 6.25 to 270 bp past the *XbaI* site at map coordinate 17.25. The *cmt* operon contains 12 open reading frames (ORFs) (Fig. 2 and 8 and Table 2). Identification of the function of these ORFs comes from biochemical studies (above) and comparisons of DNA and deduced protein sequences with published sequences (below).

The first three ORFs and the sixth ORF (from the left) encode the four components of *p*-cumate 2,3-dioxygenase: ferredoxin reductase (*cmtAa*), large subunit of the terminal dioxygenase (*cmtAb*), small subunit of the terminal dioxygenase (*cmtAc*), and ferredoxin (*cmtAd*). Separating *cmtAc* from *cmtAd* are *cmtC* and *cmtB*, encoding 2,3-dihydroxy-*p*-cumate 3,4-dioxygenase and 2,3-dihydroxy-2,3-dihydro-*p*-cumate dehydrogenase, respectively. Downstream from *cmtAd* is *cmtD*, the gene for 2-hydroxy-3-carboxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate decarboxylase; this is followed by a large ORF (831 bp), *cmtI*, having no known function. At the right end of the putative operon are *cmtEFHG*, encoding, in order, 2-hydroxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate hydrolase, 2-hydroxypenta-2,4-dienoate hydratase, acetaldehyde dehydrogenase (acylating), and 4-hydroxy-2-oxovalerate aldolase. These gene products and their deduced molecular weights are listed in Table 2.

The operon is preceded by a plausible -35/-10 promoter (44); a -24/-12 promoter (88) is not readily evident. Most of the genes are downstream from Shine-Dalgarno (ribosome-binding) sequences, except for *cmtD* and *cmtI*; these, as well as *cmtB*, overlap the preceding ORFs, so that translational coupling could occur (37).

Sequence comparisons. The BLAST program (2) was used to search the GenBank database (7) for DNA sequences having homologies to *cmt* genes and for proteins having identities with the deduced amino acid sequences of *p*-cumate pathway enzymes. Sequences were then retrieved and compared with *p*-cumate pathway enzyme sequences (summarized in Table 2).

Ten of the 12 genes of the *cmt* operon have some recogniz-

TABLE 2. Cumate pathway gene products and identities with other proteins and genes

| $cmt$ | Gene product | Deduced | Analogous | % Cmt-Tod | % Identity with other |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| gene |  | mol wt | $tod$ gene | identity | gene products (reference) |
|  |  |  | product | (reference) |  |
| $Aa$ | Ferredoxin reductase subunit of $p$-cumate dioxygenase | 43,182 | A | 34 (101) | CamA, 39 (53); MopA, 38 (79); ThcD, 37 (66); BphA4, 37 (30) |
| $Ab$ | Large terminal subunit of $p$-cumate dioxygenase | 48,973 | C1 | 31 (101) | TftA1, 31 (12); XylX, 31 (42); TcbAa, 30 (90); BphA1, 30 (4) |
| $Ac$ | Small terminal subunit of $p$-cumate dioxygenase | 20,735 | C2 | 34 (101) | BphE, 33 (29); TcbAb, 33 (90); BedC2, 31 (86); BphA2, 32 (85) |
| $C$ | 2,3-Dihydroxy-$p$-cumate dioxygenase | 35,370 | E | 23 (101) | MpcII, 28 (49); BphC, 28 (5); XylE, 26 (52) |
| $B$ | 2,3-Dihydroxy-2,3-dihydro-$p$-cumate dehydrogenase | 27,313 | D | 26 (101) | GraIII, 38 (82); PhbB, 36 (56); BenA, 34 (68); XylL, 33 (42) |
| $Ad$ | Ferredoxin subunit of $p$-cumate dioxygenase | 12,737 | B | 42 (101) | BphA3, 50 (32); BphF, 46 (29); TcbAc, 45 (90) |
| $D$ | 2-Hydroxy-3-carboxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate decarboxylase | 26,177 | — |  |  |
| $I$ | Unknown | 30,054 | — |  |  |
| $E$ | 2-Hydroxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate hydratase | 33,710 | F | 23 (61) | AcoC, 30 (48); BphD, 29 (45); DmpD, 28 (70); AcoC, 28 (73) |
| $F$ | 2-Hydroxypenta-2,4-dienoate hydratase | 28,118 | G | 54 [55] (54) | BphE, 50 [57] (51); BphE, 45 (46); DmpE, 43 (83) |
| $H$ | Acetaldehyde dehydrogenase (acylating) | 33,144 | I | 68 [66] (54) | BphG, 67 [68] (51); DmpF, 70 [70] (83); XylQ, 74 (41) |
| $G$ | 4-Hydroxy-2-oxovalerate aldolase | 38,064 | H | 75 [71] (54) | BphF, 77 [72] (51); DmpG, 75 [72] (83); XylK, 66 (41) |

able level of homology to genes encoding corresponding enzymes of other metabolic pathways. This homology is strong enough to allow their functional identities to be confirmed, but for genes encoding enzymes catalyzing the early reactions of the pathway, it is too low to allow the ready alignment of complete genes. Relationships of amino acid sequences are more apparent although, for the early enzymes of the $p$-cumate pathway, still relatively low.

The ferredoxin reductase subunit of $p$-cumate 2,3-dioxygenase (CmtAa) shows closest identity to reductase subunits of two cytochrome P-450 enzymes, camphor hydroxylase (53) and an EPTC ($S$-ethyl dipropylcarbamothioate)-degrading enzyme (probably a hydroxylase) (66), as well as to the reductase components of various reductive dioxygenases; the closest of these are the 4-methylphthalate 2,3-dioxygenase of Burkholderia cepacia (79) and biphenyl dioxygenase of Pseudomonas sp. strain LB400 (30). The reductase contains amino acid sequences typical of ADP-binding $\beta\alpha\beta$-folds (92), which constitute putative FAD (residues 7 to 38) and NAD (residues 148 to 176) binding sites (60) in the same relative locations in which they occur in other reductases.

The large ($\alpha$) terminal dioxygenase subunit of $p$-cumate 2,3-dioxygenase (CmtAb) most closely matches the terminal oxygenase of 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxycetic acid oxygenase (12) and the analogous subunit of other reductive dioxygenases, including toluate dioxygenase (101), toluate dioxygenase (42), chlorobenzene dioxygenase (90), and biphenyl dioxygenase (4). It contains residues (84-CPHRG-88...104-CFYHEW-109) that constitute a putative binding site (60) for Rieske-type [2Fe-2S] clusters, known to serve as one-electron carriers in these proteins.

The small ($\beta$) terminal dioxygenase subunit of $p$-cumate 2,3-dioxygenase (CmtAc) is most similar to the analogous subunit of other reductive dioxygenases, including toluene dioxygenase (101), biphenyl dioxygenases (29, 85), chlorobenzene dioxygenase (90), and benzene dioxygenase (86); the small subunits of 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxycetic acid oxygenase and toluate dioxygenase show a much lower level of identity (26 and 23%, respectively) (12, 42) to the Cmt protein than do the large terminal oxygenase subunits of these enzymes (above).

The ferredoxin subunit of $p$-cumate 2,3-dioxygenase (CmtAd) is similar to ferredoxins of other reductive dioxygenases, especially those of biphenyl dioxygenases (29, 32), and chlorobenzene dioxygenase of Pseudomonas strains (90). It contains residues (54-CSHG-57...74-CSWH-77) constituting a putative binding site for Rieske-type [2Fe-2S] clusters.

The 2,3-dihydroxy-2,3-dihydro-$p$-cumate dehydrogenase (CmtB) shows identity to many dehydrogenases and reductases functioning in a variety of metabolic pathways, including acetocetyl-coenzyme A reductases from the poly($\beta$-hydroxybutyrate) synthetic pathway of Chromatium vinosum (56) and the granaticin synthetic pathway of Streptomyces violaceoruber (82), and carboxyhydrodiol dehydrogenases of benzoate (68) and toluate (42) catabolic pathways.

2,3-Dihydroxy-$p$-cumate 3,4-dioxygenase (CmtC) shows only a low level of identity to many meta-cleavage dioxygenases of aromatic catabolic pathways; the closest of these appear to be metapyrocatechase II of Alcaligenes eutrophus (49), 2,3-dihydroxybiphenyl 1,2-dioxygenase of Rhodococcus globerulus P6 (5), and catechol 2,3-dioxygenase of a Beijerinckia sp. (52).

The deduced amino acid sequences of CmtD (2-hydroxy-3-carboxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate decarboxylase) and CmtI do not show identity to sequences in the GenBank database. The decarboxylase is probably the first of its type for which an encoding DNA sequence has been determined, while the function of the $cmtI$ gene product remains unknown.

2-Hydroxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate hydrolase (CmtE) is most similar to dihydrolipoamide acetyltransferases (involved in acetoin metabolism and encoded by $acoC$) of $P$. putida (48) and Alcaligenes eutrophus (73), to several enzymes catalyzing the analogous hydrolase reaction in other meta-cleavage pathways (45, 70), and, to a lesser extent, to a variety of other hydrolases.

The last three enzymes of the $p$-cumate pathway are much more closely related to other aromatic catabolic pathway enzymes than are the enzymes functioning at earlier steps. 2-Hydroxypenta-2,4-dienoate hydratase (CmtF) has 54 and 50% identity to this enzyme from the toluene (54) and biphenyl (51) pathways, respectively. There is, correspondingly, a high enough level of homology of the genes encoding these enzymes to align them with $cmtF$ (55 and 57% for $todG$ and $bphE$, respectively). 4-Hydroxy-2-oxovalerate aldolase and acetaldehyde dehydrogenase (acylating) (CmtG and CmtH) have the closest identity to corresponding enzymes of other aromatic meta-cleavage pathways. This coincides with a high level of homology (66 to 72%) of the genes ($cmtG$ and $cmtH$) encoding them to genes encoding the same enzymes from the $tod$ (54), $bph$ (biphenyl catabolic pathway of Pseudomonas sp. strain KKS102) (51), and $dmp$ (dimethylphenol catabolic pathway of Pseudomonas sp. strain CF600) operons (83).

Identification of genes encoding the production of indigo from indole. The genes encoding the conversion of $p$-cymene to $p$-cumate have not been located. A search for these genes

1 AAGCTTCCCGGTTGCCGAGGCGGCA GTTATCGGTGTCCCCGACGAGATCAA GGGGCAGGTACCAGTTGCCTTTTGTC AGGCTCCGTAAGACTGCTTCCGATGA ACTCCAGGCGGAGAGGCTCGGGCAGA GATACCGCCAGGGGTAGAGA
151 GCCGTCTGGGGGCGGTGGCGGACCTG CTTGGGTGTATATCGTCAATCTCCTG CCGAAAAACGGTTCAAGCAAAATTAC TTCGTCGGTCATTGCAAGCCCCTGGG CTCGCAAGGGGACTTGTCACCCTTGA CGGACCCCTAGTG
301 CACTCGATGAGATTCGCCATGCCCTG AGACGTGGACGGGACGGGGGAACTGAG AGGTTACGGGCTCTGCTAGCTCGAAA ATTAGTGAGGGATCCGGTTGTTAAAT CGCCGTCAAAGGGCAAAGGCCCCTAG CAACTTGACAGGTGAATCGA
(-35)
451 GGCGGATGTTTTTTTGA AAAACAGACAATCTGGTCTGTTTGTATTATAAGTAAAAACACCCACGTACGTGGGTGCGATA CAAGCGAGAGAGGATGGTCAATCCGAT GGGCGAAGACATCAGCAAAGATCGTG ATTATCGGTGCCGG
(-10)                                                                                     SD cmtAa M G E D I S K I V I I G A G
601 TCAGGCGGGGCGACGGTTGGCCTTCG GCCCTGCGCCGCAACGGATTGCCC GGTGAAATCACCCCTAGTGGGAGAGGAGAGCCA CTTGCCGTATGAAAGCCGCAAGCTATCC AAAGGAAATGCTGGGCCAGAGGCAAGG CTCACAAGTGAT
Q A G A T V A F G L R R N G F A G E I T L V G E E S H L P Y E R P Q L S K E M L R P E A S A H K S I
751 CAAGACACGGGCTGACTACGAGGAGC AAGCATTTCTCTTGGAGCTCGGGT TGC AAAAGTGGTCGGTCTGACGCTCAGGCGCA CAGCATCGTCTTGGATGACGGTCGCAG CTTCGGCCTTTGACCGGCTGGTGATC GCCAACGGGTGTGCGAGCC
K T R A D Y E E Q S I L L E L G C K V V R A D A Q A H S I V L D D G R Q L A F D R L V I A T G V Q P
901 AGCGCACTGTCTCGCATTTTCAGGGT GCACATCGGGTCCACTACCTGCGC ACGCTCGAAGATGCAGCGCTTGC GCCACCTTGAAAGGAAGTCACTAGCGAT CGTTGGCGGAGGCGTGATGGACTCGAG GGTTCGCCGT
R R L S S A F Q G A H R V H Y L R T L E D A A R L R A D L E A G K S L A I V G G G V I G L E V A A A
1051 AGCGGTCGCGCTGAACTGTCCGGTGC CCTGATCGAAGCTGCTGACCGGCT CATGTGCGGCGAGGTGGACGGTTTCCGCTT ATCTGGATCGGGCGCACCGGCGAAACG GGTGACATTCGCTACGGCGTGGGCCA CCCTGAGTT
A R A L N C P V T L I E A A D R L M S R S V D E V V S A Y L D R A H R R N G V D I R Y G V A A T E L
1201 GCTGGACGATGGCGTCTCAGGCTTTCC GACGGCGCACCGTGGCCGCA GAGGCTGTGGTCTGGGTATCGGTGTAACGCGG AACATCGGAGGGCTTTGAAACCTGGAT ATCACC GATGCCACTGGGGTGC GGGTCTGATGCGTACAGCCA
L D D G R L R L S D G G T V P A E A V L V G I G V T P N I E G F E H L D I T D A T G V R V D A Y S Q
1351 GACTGTCGTTCCGGCATTTTGGCCAC CGGGA TGATCGCCTCACAGCCCAATGGCGGAGGTTTCGGGCATCGAGACCTGGGCAACGCCCAGGACCATGCACTGTGCAAGAAACCTGATGGGCGAAGCGGTGCCCTACGAAGC
T V V P G I F A T G D I A S Q P N G G G F G R I E T W A N A Q D H A L N L V K N L M G E A V P Y E A
1501 CCCGGTGTGGTTCTGGTCTGACCAAG GACCATCACTTGCGGGTCGTTGGGACGGGATTGTCGGGGGATGAGGAGACGTCTTCAGCGTTTTTCGACTCGAGCCAATCAGCAGGTCATCGGTTTGGCC
P V W F W S D Q G P I N L Q V V G D A A N G R R I V R G D E H G D V F S V F R L D A N Q Q V I G C A
1651 GACGGTCAACTCACC AAAAGACATGGCTGTGGCACGTCGTTGGTGAAAGCAACGCAGTAGCGTCGATCCGCAACGGCTGGCTGACCAACACCATCCATTACGCACTGTGCCCCTCTGAATGCAGTCTGAAACTACGGGAA AACACC
T V N S P K D M A V A R R W V K Q R S S V D P Q R L A D P T I P L R D C A V . SD cmtAb
1801 ATGAATAATGACAAGAATCTGGTAGA GATCGACGATGAAAACCTCTTGT CCGTGTGGCTCGCGAGTCGTTGAGCGGAAAGGGT CCTGGCCGAGGATACGAGAAAGATCTCGA CC GCTGCTGGCTTTATGTTGGCCACACATCCGAG
M N N D K N L V E I D D E N L L F R V A R E S F V S E E V L A E E Y E K I F D R C W L Y V G H T S E
1951 TTCAAAAAGCCTGGCGATTTTCGTCA CTCGCACTGTGCGCGCGGCAAACCTGCTGGTGACAATGGGAACGGATCGGACGATCAATGCTTTCTTCAATACCTGCCCCGACC GTGGCGCCACTGTTTGCCTGAGCGATCAGGCA AACTCCAAG
F K K P G D F V T R T V A R R N L L V T M G T D R T I N A F F N T C P H R G A T V C R E R S G N S K
2101 AACTTCCAGTGCTTCTACCATGGCTG GGTATT CGGTCGAAGAGCTCAGGCGGCTAT TGGCGCTGACTTACTGGCGGGGCAACCTAGTGC CGGTCGCGCTTCGACATCTACGCCC GCTT
N F Q C F Y H G W V F G C D G N L K S Q P G K E R Y C A D F I T G G A G N L V P V P R F D I Y A G F
2251 TGCTTCGTCAGCTTCAATGCCGAGGT GGAACCACTGCCC GACTATTTGGCAGGAGCCAAGGAGTACCTGGTTTCCAAGTATTC CGAGAGGGCATGGGTATCACCAGGCA CCCAGGAATACGCCATCCGTGCAA AACTGGAAA
C F V S F N A E V E P L P D Y L A G A K E Y L E L V S K Y S E S G M G I T T G T Q E Y A I R A N W K
2401 TTGCTCGTTGAGAACAGTATTGACGG CTATCACGCTGTCACCACCACGCG AGTTATCTCGACTACCTGAAAAACATCAATGATGGCCTTTTCGGGCGCAAGGCAAGAGCACTGACCTCGGTAATGGTCA TGGGTAATTGAA
L L V E N S I D G Y H A V S T H A S Y L D Y L K N I N D G F S G A K L E G K S T D L G N G H A V I E
2551 TTCAGTGCTC TTTGGGACGGCCGATTTG CCTGGGTTCCGATCTGGGGGGAGGAGGGCAAGAGATCGACCAGATCTATGCA CGGTTGGT GCAACTGGATGGTGGGAGATGGCCGACC GATGGGTACAAGAACCGCAACCTG
F S A P W G R P I A S W V P I W G E E G K Q E I D Q I Y A R L V E L H G A E M A D R M A Y K N R N L
2701 CTGATTTTCCGAAATCTCATCATCAA CGACATCATGGCAATTACGGTGC GGAACCTTCTATCCGCAGGCGGAACATGCTGCAACGGTTGGTCATTGGCGGCAAGGAGACTGGGCGCAAGTACCGCCTCAGCA AC
L I F P N L I I N D I M A I T V R T F Y P Q A P N Y M H V N G W S L A P N E E S D W A R K Y R L S N
2851 TTCCCTGGAGTTTCTTGGCCCAAGG CGGTTTCGCAAAGCCGGACGATGTCGGAAGGCGCTGGAGACGGGCTTCAGCA AACTCCGACTGGTGCCGAGGACATTTCCAAGGAAATGGGCAAGGCCAACTAGACGAT
F L E F L G P G G F A T P D D V E A L E S C Q N G F S N Y R L V P W S D I S K G M G K E T A N Y D D
3001 GAGCTGCAGATGCGTGTTTCTGGAC CGGATGGAACCAATTCA TCGGTGGCGGCCACGGGCTTCGATGAATACATACCTACCATCGCTTTGGCCTGAGGATAAGCCCGATGAGTGCCGTTGCCCTTAGAAAAAGAAACCTCTGC
E L Q M R A F W T R W N Q F I G G A P T P D S G V Q Y I P T I A L A . SD cmtAc M S A V A L E K E P L R
3151 GTATCCCATCGTCCCA GGACTTCGCCG CCTT CGTCA CCCGCA GCGAAGTGGAGGACCTGCTTTATACGCGGATGACCCGTGCGC TGCGGAGGGGTGAT TCGGGCTGATGAAAGAGACGGGCTCACGGCGAGTACCCCGGCTCACGGACGCGCCACTGGGT CAGCAATA
I P S S Q D F A A F V T R S E V D L L Y H E A E L L D T W H L H D W L A L F T E D C S Y F V P S T
3301 CCGACC TGGCCGCA CCGGCCAGCGCCGACAGCCTGTTTTTATATCGCCGATGACCCGTGCGCCTTGGCGAGGGGTGATTCGGGCTGATGAAAGAGACGGGCTCACGGCGAGTACCCCGGCTCACGGACGCGCCACTGGGT CAGCAATA
D L P R T A S A D D S L F Y I A D D A V R L R E R V I R L M K K T A H A E Y P R S R T R H L V S N I
3451 TCCGCATTCTGGCTGCAAATGCGGAA GAGATTCAGGTGGCCTCCGGCTTCG TGACCTACCGCATGAAGCTCGGCAACAGTGATG CCTATGCGGTTGCGTCAATCGATGGGCAACTGGCCATCGTTGAGAAGC
R I L A A N A E E I Q V A S A F V T Y R M K L G N S D A Y V G S T H Y R L R R I D G Q L R I V E K R
3601 GCTGTTTCC TGGACC TCGAAGCGCTGGCCCGCATGGGCGGTCAGCATCTCTGTAACGGGACAACGATGGATACACACTTCCCTTCCGCTACAAGAAGTTGGCCTATGCGGGA TCAACGTGACCTGTCCAGGTGC
C F L D L E A L R P H G R V S I I L . SD cmtC M D I T L P F R Y K K L A Y A A I N V T D L S R S V P
3751 CGTTCTATCGTGGACATCGGGGCTCG ACCTTTGTGAAGCGAGGATGGCGACATCGGCCTATTTTGC TGCA GTCGCGGACACCACAACATTGTTCTC TACCAGGGCCCCGGACAGGGTCTCAAGCGTGTGGGCTTCGAGCTGGGAGCAAAGAGA
F Y R D I V G L D L V K Q D G D I A Y F R C S R D H H N I V L Y Q A P G H G L K R V G F E L E Q E S

FIG. 8. Sequence of an 11,260-bp DNA segment from *P. putida* F1 that encodes the metabolism of *p*-cumate to amphibolic intermediates. The sequence begins at the *HindIII* site at map coordinate 6.25 (Fig. 2) and extends past the *XbaI* site at map coordinate 17.25. Possible promoter and Shine-Dalgarno (SD) sequences are underlined; the double underline indicates a possible transcription termination sequence.

was made by “walking” along the chromosome, using colony hybridization to identify recombinant bacteria carrying overlapping DNA fragments. The analogous methyl group-oxidizing enzyme of the TOL plasmid-encoded *m*-xylene catabolic pathway, xylene monooxygenase, has been shown to convert indole to indigo (50, 62), and it was thought that *p*-cymene monooxygenase might perform similarly, a possibility supported by the fact that strain F1, after growth on *p*-cymene, converts indole to indigo (21). Although *E. coli* JM109 carrying either pRE770 or pRE834 was unable to convert indole to indigo, that color-forming reaction was catalyzed by strain JM109 carrying both plasmids simultaneously. Plasmid pRE850, constructed by ligating parts of pRE770 and pRE834 (Fig. 2, map coordinates 21.5 to 29.8) to pBluescriptII KS, also conferred on *E. coli* JM109 the ability to convert indole to indigo. However, these bacteria did not transform *p*-cymene, *p*-cumyl alcohol,

or *p*-cumyl aldehyde; thus, pRE850 does not encode the enzymes involved in the transformation of *p*-cymene to *p*-cumate.

Another enzyme produced by *P. putida* F1 which is capable of the conversion of indole to indigo is toluene 2,3-dioxygenase (28), encoded by the *tod* operon (101, 102). The sequence of the *tod* operon has been published (54, 61, 89, 101). It was obtained from GenBank (accession numbers J04996, U09250, U18304, and M64080) and used to construct a restriction map which was compared with the restriction map constructed here by using cloned DNA fragments (Fig. 2). The maps are identical for map coordinates 18.5 to 31.5. To further confirm that these are *tod* genes, the right end of the DNA fragment inserted in pRE823 and both ends of the fragment inserted in pRE850 were sequenced (single strand). The combined sequences are identical to the published sequences (greater than 99% for 1,340 total bases).

VOL. 178, 1996

$p$-CUMATE CATABOLISM BY $P$. PUTIDA F1 1359

3901 GTGACGTGGCGCCGCTTCGAGCATTTCGACCAGCGGGCATGCAACCCACTTGGGTATCGGCGGAGGAGGCCAAGGAGCTTAGGCAGGGGACTAGGTTTCCGGTGCGTGAACGCCACAGGGACTGCTGTTCGAACTGTTTGTCCGGA
D V R A A F E H F D Q R G M Q P T W V S A E E A K Q L R Q G L G F R V R E R H S G L L F E L F V G N

4051 ACATGCACCTCAGCAAATCGTTGTTCCGACAGTGGCCAAGATCGCGGTATCGGCCATGTGGTGATTGGCAGCGAGAACTTCGAAGGATCTCGGATTCCCTGGTTGATGACTCGGCTTTTCGGGTTTCCGGACCTGATCGGAAAGCCCA
M H L S N P F V P T V A K I A R I G H V V I G S E N F E G S R D S L V D D F G F R V S D L I E D R I

4201 TCGTCTTCATGCGTTGCCATCCCAATCCGTTCACCACGTTCGAGGAGCAGACTATTTCCATATGTCATTTTCATGGTCACGGGACATCGGCAAGGGCGCTGTATCGCATCAAGCAGCATATCA
V F M R C H P N P F H H T F A V G P A S S S H H F H V N F M V T D I D D I G K A L Y R I K Q H D I K

4351 AGGTGGTCTTCGGTCCCCGGCATCCGCGGTCGGACAGCGTCTTTTTCTACTTCCCTGACCCCCGACGGCATCACGGTGGAGTACAGCTCGGCATGGGAGGAGTTTCGCTGAGCACGGCGCTCGGCGGCTACATGGAAACCTGTGGC
V V F G P G R H P P S D S V F F Y F L D P D G I T V E Y S F G M E E F A E H G A R P P R Y M E P V P

4501 CCGAGTCGGTGGATGCATGGGGAGCAGTGGCGACGGCCAGTTTCGGTCGACGGGACCGATCGAAACGGAGCGGATGCCACACCCCCATGCAAAGGGGGTACTGGCATGAGCACGCTGAGCAGAAAACGCCTTGGGAGGGACAGGT
E S L D A W G A V P D G Q F G R S G P I E R E R M P T P H A K G V L A
SD cmtBM S T L S R N A L P L E G Q V

4651 CGCAGTAGTTACGGGCGGAGCCACGGGTATCGGGTCTGGGATCGTCGAGGGCTCGTGGGGTTGGGGGCCCGGGTCAACGGCCTCGGATATCGATGAGTCGGG CCTCTCGTTGTTTGGAGCGTCTGGCCGCAAAGCATGGGAGCGCTAT
A V V T G G A H G I G L G I V E R L L L G L G A R V T A S D I D E S G L S L L C E R L A A K H A D A I

4801 AGCGGTGCATGCCGCGATCTCTCTGGAAGAGCAAGGTGCCAAGGACTGCAACGGGCTCGGGTCGAGCGCTTCTGGTTACAGATACTGGTGAACTGCGGGGGGGGGGTGTGATCCGGGCTTTTCTGGAGCATACACCCGAGACCTT
A V H A A D L S E E Q G A Q G L H R A A V E R F G S V Q I L V N C A A G G G V I R P F L E H T P E T L

4951 GAAGGCCACCATCGATCGTAACCTGTGGACTGCGTTGTGGTCAGCCGGTATTCCTGCCCCGACATGCTCGGCGAGTACGGTCGGATCATCAACATCGGCGCCGACTCGGTACGCAAAGGTCTGCGGGACCATGCGGCTACAAGGC
K A T I D R N L W T A L W C S R V F L P D M L A R Q Y G R I I N I G A D S V R N G L P D H A Y N A

5101 AGCCAAGGGCGGTATGCACGGACTGACCACGGCCTGGCGCGGAGTTCCCGCCAGGGGTTACGGTGAACAGGTTGCGCGGCGGTGACACCGAAGTGTGGGTCAGAATCAAGAACGCAAACCCCGAGCTCGCCCAGGATT
A K G G M H G L T T G L A R E F A R Q G V T V N T V A P C A V N T E V W V R I K N A N P E L A Q R F

5251 TCTGGATGTCATTCCGATGGGCGGGTGGCGAGATCGAAAGGTTGCGTATGGTTGCTACCTGGCTCAGGGGAGGCGGGCTTCTGTCACGGTCAATCAGCGTCAACGGCGCAGCAATGCTGTGAGGACAGTGATAGA
L D V I P M G R V G E I E V A S M V G Y L A Q P E A A F V T G Q V I S V N G G S T M L SD cmtAd M T

5401 CTAACATCATCGAGACAGTTGACCTGACTGACCTCGTGGCCCTTGCGCGACCGATGACTGCTGAGGGTGAGATTCTTCGCGTCAAGCTGCCATCCGGTCAAGGCTCTGGCAATCTACTGGCTCAACGGGAGTTTCTTGCACCAGCG
N I I E T V D L T D L V G L C A T D D V A E G E I L R V K L P S G H A L A I Y C V N G E F F A T D D

5551 ACATCTGCTCCCACGGCGAGGCATCCTTGTGGAGGATGGTTGCTCGATGGCTACGAGGTCGAGTGGCACTTTCGACATTTCGTACAGGGCATGCCCCTGGCGATGAGCACCCTTGGGAAAGCTGGCCGG
I C S H G E A S L S E D G S L D G Y E V E C S W H F G R F D I R T G H A C A M P C E H P L R S W P V

5701 TCACAGTCGAGGGTGGGCGAGATCTTCGTGATGGGGGGCGACCCCTGTATGAGCGGCTCGATATTTCCACTTTGAAACAGGGTGCGGCGTTGGGCGACATGGG CCTGGGGGCACCTGCAGGCC
T V E G G Q I F V D V G A H P V
cmtD M S G V D I S T L E Q R V R V A A R A L G R H G L V Q A W G H C S A

5851 CCGGATCGATGCAGAGTCTTCGTGGTCTGCGGCGCCCGCCCATGGCCGATATCGAAGTCGGTGAGCCCCGACATAGTGGCATCGAAAGGGGCGCTACCGCCCGGTGTGGGCGAGGTTTCGCATCCACAGCAAATCTACCCGGG
R I D A E S F V V C A A R P M G R I E V G E P G T I V P I E G A L P P G V L G E V R I H Q Q I Y R R

6001 ACGTCCGGACGTGGCGGTATTTGTGCTTTCATGGCCACATGTCGTAGC ACTCTCCACACTGGCAGCGTGGAAAGCCGCTCATGGTGATGGTCATTCAATGCGGCGTGCCCTTCTGGGACGTTTATTGGGGAGCA
R P D V G G I C R F M P P H V V A L S T L R S V P K P R H G V G A F N A A C R F W D D P R L L R D D

6151 CGCTTTGGCGGGGAGCTGGCGGCGACC TTGGACAAGCCCCATCCTGATGCGCGCCAATGGCGGGTGACC GTTGGGCTAACTCGAAACTGGCCACCGGTTTCGCTTGGCCTGGAGGATGCCCGCCGATCGGAAAGCGTGGT
A L A A E L A A H L G Q A P S L V M R A N G A V T V G P N I E L A T G F A W C L E D A A R I E T L V

6301 GGCGTCCATGGTCGATGGCCGAGCGTGATGACTTGCCTGACTGCTGAAAGAGATCGATGCGAGACAAGTCAGTTGGGCGCGGTCTCGAGGCACTGTGGGATTACCTGACCCGGAGAGCCTGGGCGAGGGGCGC
R S M V D V A E R D D A A C L T A E E I D A R Q V S S G A V F E R L W D Y L T A D D P E S L G S G A A

6451 ATTCCCA GTTCCACAGTGGGGACGGCCATGACTTTCGGTATGCGCTGTTACGCAAATCATGGCGAGGACTGGAGCGACTCGTGCTTGGCGCAAATTAAGGGTGAGCGAATCGTGACTCCATCAATCTCCCTGGATATCTCGAGCTTC
F P V P Q W G R P
cmtIM T F G M R C Y A I M A R T G A E T R A I K G E R I V T P S I S L D I S S F

6601 GATGGCCAAAATATCCCGGCAACGCAGAAACAGGCCGAGAGACGGCAAACAGC TCCCCGGATAATCGAAGCCGCCATCAGCGAGCTGTTGCACAACGGCTACGCAAGAATCCGTGTCGCAAAGTGGCGATTCGCGCAAGGTGTC
D G K I S R A T Q N P G R E T R R N T L P D N R S R H Q R A V A Q R L R R N P C R Q G G D C R Q G V

6751 GCGCGGGGCTCAATCGCATCATTTCGACCAAGGAAAGCCTCGTCCCTTGGGCACTGGAGAGCCTGTACCAGGCTCGACGGAGGTCAGCATGAAGGTCATCGACAACCTGGGCTTGGGAGGATGTGCTGATGCGGAGTC
A R G S I A S F S D Q G K P R P C G T G D A V P G L D G G Q H E G H R Q P G F G G C A G C A D A G V

6901 GGCCAAGTTCTATCTGGGGCGGAAC TTTACTAT TGCCATGTCACTTGGGCGACAGGAATCCCGAGCTGGGAAAGGTGGCATCATGGCCCGGAAGTACGGCCTGCCCATCGAGAAGGCATGGGATGCGTTGACTCG
G Q V L S G A E L Y Y C H V T L E L G R Q O S R A A E E G A H H G P Q V P P A H R E G M A G C V D S

7051 CTCCGGTCTTGGACGAAGAGCCTGCA CGCAGTGT TGAGCATC ACTCAGAGGTGTATCGGGGCATGACCACCCGGGCTTCTGGGCAACGATCCGGGATACGGGAAATACGGGAGCTTTAC TCGAGCAGTGGT CGAAGATAGCGG TGCGGTTCA
L R S G R R A C T H S V E H H S E C L S R H D H P A L L L A Q R S G I R E L Y I R A V V E D S A C V H

7201 GAACCAGCACTCCCTCAAACGTTAACGGCTACACCCCTTCCGGGACTCCATCTCAACCCGCTGCTGGCCGTCAGCACTGGGCTGTGTCGGGTTTAATTCTATAGAGAGGTATTTATAGAGTCT
E P A L P Q T L T A T P S F R L R R H S I S T A I H T A A A A P S A V A V S S C V
SD cmtEM S L

7351 TTGGCCTTGATCTGCTTGGCGCGGAAATCCGTTTCGTCGACACCAAAAGCTT CGGCACGATCCGGGATTCGGGCAAGGGGAACCCCGAAACTATCATTTTCTTGCATGGGCATCAACGGCCACCTTGGGAGGCTACGCAAAGACCT
W L D L L G A E I R F V D T K S F G T I R I A E A G K G N P E T I I F L H G I N G H L E A Y A K N L

FIG. 8—Continued.

DISCUSSION

$P$. putida F1 grows with $p$-cumate by using an eight-step catabolic pathway (Fig. 1) that appears to be no different from that previously described for another $P$. putida strain, PL (15–17, 72, 83, 87). The initial steps in the oxidation of $p$-cumate are similar to those established for the metabolism of aromatic hydrocarbons such as toluene and biphenyl (35, 76) except that the substrates in the $p$-cumate pathway are all carboxylic acids. Thus, the aromatic substrate is oxidized by a reductive dioxygenase (Fig. 1, enzyme A) to a cis-cyclohexadienediol (compound II), which is converted by a diol dehydrogenase (enzyme B) to a catechol (compound III). This is then acted on by a second dioxygenase (enzyme C), which opens the aromatic ring.

The ring cleavage product 2-hydroxy-3-carboxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate (Fig. 1, compound IV) is a β-keto acid and as such undergoes a slow spontaneous decarboxylation (27). A decarboxylase enzyme improves the efficiency of $p$-cumate catabolism, as evidenced by a decarboxylase-negative mutant of $P$.

putida PL (strain PL-RF1) isolated by DeFrank and Ribbons (17), which accumulates large quantities of the ring cleavage product when grown in the presence of $p$-cumate. Strain PL-RF1 is able to grow with $p$-cumate (21) but only very slowly, presumably by taking advantage of the slow nonenzymatic decarboxylation of 2-hydroxy-3-carboxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate.

Neither the decarboxylase gene, $cmtD$, from $P$. putida F1 nor the deduced amino acid sequence of the decarboxylase is similar to other sequences in the GenBank database. The substrate of this enzyme does not occur often in aromatic catabolic pathways; it has been demonstrated only for other $p$-cumate catabolic pathways (17, 69) and for the 4-methylphthalate catabolic pathway of *Pseudomonas fluorescens* JT701 (77). A similar decarboxylation reaction occurs in the protocatechuate (3,4-dihydroxybenzoate) catabolic pathway in *Bacillus macerans* (10). There, the product formed from protocatechuate by ring cleavage between carbons 2 and 3 (5-carboxy-2-hydroxymuconic semialdehyde) is the substrate of a decarboxylase that removes the carboxyl group at C-5. Because this carboxyl is located β to a carbonyl,

1360 EATON

7501 GATTCCGCTGTCGAAGGATTTCCATGCAATGGGTACGACTATGTGGGGCACGGTCTGCCAGCAAACCGTTCTGACTACGACCCGCTCATGGTGCCGAGCAACTCGGCGAGCTGATGGATGCGCCTCGGTATCGAGAAAGCGGACCCT
I P L S K D F H V I A Y D Y V G H G L S S K P V R D Y D P L M L A E Q L G E L M D A L G I E K A H L

7651 GTCGGGCGAGTCGCTGGGTGGTGGCTCCGGTCATTTCGCCGCCAGGTACCCGCAGCGGTGGGGCGGCTAATGCTGAATACTTCTGCTGGTATCCCGATCGTGACCGGAAAAGGGGCGAGCGGACCTGGAGCACTTCAATCGCGTTGAA
S G E S L G G W V S G H F A A R Y P Q R V G R L M L N T S A G I P I V T E K G R A D L E H F I A L N

7801 CAGGCGCAACATCGACAACAACTCCAACTTATGAATCGGTGCAGGCACGTTGCAATGGCTGATTCATCCCAAACATCGTCATCTGGTGAAACGATGAGCTCATCAATCTGGCTCTGGCATCTACTGGAGCCGGAGAGTCGAGCGATGCT
R R N I D N T P T Y E S V Q A R L Q W L I H P N N R H L V N D E L I N L R L R I Y L Q P E S R A M L

7951 GCCGAAGCTGAACGAAAATCCTTGTGCATCAGGATGACTACCTGATCCCGCTGAAAAGCTTCCGGCCGGCACGCTGTTCTGTGGACGATGACAACCAATCCATGACACCGAGTCGGTCAAGGCGGCGCAGGCAAGGGTGCCCCGGCAG
P K L N E I L V H H D D Y L I P L E K L P A G T L F L W T H D N P I H D T E S V K A A Q A R V P G S

8101 CAGTCTCTACTTCGTCAAGGGCGAATCGGCGCATTTGCGCAGTAGCGATCGACGAGTTCAACACTCTGGGCGTGGTTCTTCAAGTCCGGCCAGGTGGAGTGAGGAGCACCTCATGAATGAAGCCAACGTGATTGCGAACCTGT
S L Y F V K G E S A H W P Q Y E S I D E F N T L A L R F F K S G Q V E SD cmtFM N E A N V I A N L L

8251 TATGGGATGCGCAGCGGCAAAGCTGCCCCTGTGCACGGGTGCGGGAAATTTTCGAGGGGAAGAGCGAGGTTGACCAGGCGCTATTTGGCTATGCGGCTACAGCAGGTTGAATGTTCAAGCCGCAAGTTGGAGGGCCGACGTATCGTGGTC
W D A Q R Q K L P C A P V R E Y F E G K S E V D Q A L L A Y A V Q Q V N V Q R Q V E G G R R I V G R

8401 GCAAGATCGGCGCTTACCTCTCCGGCAGTCGAAGCAATTGGGTGATCGGCGGACTTGGCACGTGCTGGACGACATGGGATCGCGAGCCATCAACACTGCGCGTCTTCTGCAGCCCAAGGTCGAAAGCTGAGATCG
K I G L T S P A V Q K Q L G V D R P D F G T L L D D M A I V D G E P I N T A R L L Q P K V E A E I A

8551 CCCTGGTACTCGAGCGTGACCTCGATCGGGAGCGTCAACAGTCGGCGACAGCGTATGCACCTGCTGCAATCGAGGTGGGATAGCCGTATCAGGGTTGGAACATCCGGCTTTGGTGACACCGTGGCAGACAACG
L V L E R D L D R E R H T V A D L I D A T A Y A L A A I E V V D S R I T G W N I R F V D T V A D N A

8701 CCTCATCGGGCTTGTTCGTACTCGGTACTCGGCTTGGGCTGTGGAAGCTTGATCGGCGATGGCGGTGGGAAGAGCTTGTATCGCAAGGGGCTGGAGCTGCCCTGGCAACCCGGTGAACGCGAGCGC
S S G L F V L G T Q P V G L S K L D L A G M S M R M A R G E E L V S Q G A G A A C L G N P L N A A R

8851 GTTGGCTTGGCTGACACGTTGGTCCAAGTGGGACGCCATTGGCTGCCCGGCTCTGGGGCCAATGGTCGGTCAACCTATACGGATCGATGGCTCGCCCCGGTACGCAATT
W L A D T L V Q V G T P L R A G D V V L T G A L G P M V A V E S G H T Y T A W I D G F A P V R A I F

9001 TCTCCTGAAGGAGTTCCCTCTCATGCAAACACATGATGGTAAGACCGCAGTGGCCATTATCGGTTCCGGCAAACATCGGCACCAGATCTAAATGGTAAAACTCCTGCCATGGCAAACACCTGAGAATGGGGGCCCTTCTGTCGGCATCGATCCG
S SD cmtHM Q T H D G K T A V A I I G S G N I G T D L M V K I L R H G K H L R M G A F V G I D P

9151 GAGTCCGATGGTCTCAAGCGCGCCAAAGGATGGGCGTCCCCACGGTGAGCACGGCATCGAAGGATTATTGTCCCCACCCGATTTTGGCTCCATCGGCTTCGTATTGATGCCACCGGCGCATGACGTCACGAGGCAACTG
E S D G L K R A E R M G V P T V S T G I E G L L S H P D F G S I I G F V F D A T S A G A H A R H E Q L

9301 CTGCGGCCCACGGCGTACGGTGATCGACCCGGGCGATCGGGCGTTCTGGTGGCCGAGTAAATCGAAACAGCATCTGGATGGCCGAAACGTCAACATGGTGACCTGTGGCCAGGCGACGATTCCTATGGTTGCT
L R P H G V R V I D L T P A A I G P F V V P A V N I E Q H L D A P N V N M V T C G G Q A T I P M V A

9451 GCTTTTCGGCGTGTGGCCAGTCGAGATTGTGCGTTCCATTTCCAGTGGCCGGGACCGGGGACAGGGGAACATTGACGAGTTCACCGAGACCACCTCAAACGCACTGTTCGCGTAGGGGGCCCAGCGTGGC
A V S R V V P V E Y A E I V A S I S S R S A G P G T R A N I D E F T E T T S N A I V R V G G A Q R G

9601 AAGGCAATCATCATCCTCAATCCGGCAGAGCCTCGCTGATCGCGGACACCGTCTACTGGTGGGGGGCATGGGAAGGATCGGCGTATGGGCTTCCGAGTGGGCGCATACGTGGCCTGGATAT
K A I I I L N P A E P P L I M R D T V Y C L V P G H A D R Q A I V E S V E R M A S A V A A Y V P G Y

9751 CGGCTCAAGCAGACCGTGCAGTTTGATGAGTTCAAGGGCCCATGCGGAGGCAAACCCGGTCTCAAGGTTCTGAGTTTCTCGAAGTGGGCGCCGACATACCTGCGGAGCTATGCGGGAATCTGGAC
R L K Q T V Q F D E F K G R M P Q E T G S A Q A P R L K V S V F L E V E G A G H Y L P S Y A G N L D

9901 ATCATGACCAACGGCTGCGGACGGCCGAGCGCATCGGCGGGTGGCTGCGTTAAGGAGGAAACGATATGTTGACACCAGAAAAAATATATGTCTCAGACGTGACCCCTACGTGACGGCATGCGGTCCGCCCAT
I M T S A A L A T A E R I A A R Q P V A A SD cmtG M F D T R R K K I Y V S D V T L R D G M H A V R H

10051 CAGTACAGCCTGGCCGATGCCGAACGCAJGCCAAGGGCGTGGATGAGGCGGTGGACAGGATTGAGGTCGCTATGGCGATGGGCTGCAAGGGTCGTGCTTCAACTATGGGTTCGGTCACACACTGATCTTGAAATGGTGGAGGCC
Q Y S L A D A E R I A R A L D E A G V D S I E V A H G D G L Q G S S F N Y G F G A H T D L E W I E R

10201 GTTGCCGCTACAGTGAGGGGGGAAGATCGCCACAGCTATTCGTCCTTGGAAATCGGTACTGTCATGACCTGAAGAAGCGGAATGCGGCGGGGCAAGTGTGTTGCGGTAGCCACCGGAGGCGACATTTCCAGCGCAC
V A A T V R R A K I A T L L L P G I G T V H D L K N A N A A G A S V V R V A T H C T E A D I S Q Q H

10351 ATCGAGTATGCCCGCAAGCTGGGTATGGGACGGGGCTTTTTGTGATGAGCCACATGACAACCTCCGAGCGGCACTGGGCTGTCGAGGCAAAGAAGAGAGCTACGGCGCTCAGTGCATCTATGGTTCGACTCCGGTGGTGAGTG
I E Y A R K L G M D T V G F L M M S H M T T P T A L A V E A K K M E S Y G A Q C I Y V V D S G G A M

10501 AACATGTACGACATCGCTGACCGCTTCAAAGCACTCAAGGATGTGCTGGATCCCTCGACTAAACTGGTATGCAAGGCAACATAACCTGAGTCTGGGCGTAGCCAACTCGATCGTTGCGACCGTGATTTGATGCC
N M Y D I A D R F K A L K D V L D P S T Q T G M H A H H N L S L G V A N S I V A L E Y G C D R I D A

10651 AGTTTGACGGGTATGGGAGGGGAGCAGGAAACGCAACCTCTGGAGGTCTTCAATGGCGGTAGACCGTATGGGGCTGAAGCACGGTTGTGATGGCGCAATGTGATGCTGCGGAGGAAATTGTGGCCCCCTGGAGGCGGCA
S L T G M G A G A G N A P L E V F I A A V D R M G L K H G C D V R K L I D A A E E I V R P L Q E R P

10801 GTTCGTGTAGACAGGAAACACTTGCGCTGGGTTATGCTGGGAGCTTCCCTCGGCATACGGAGGGCGGGCACATAAGTATGGGCTTTGAGCTTTGGAGCTGGGTTAGGCGTGCATGGTCGGGTCAG
V R V D R E T L A L G Y A G V Y S S F L R H H T E A A A H K Y G L D A A F E I L V E L G R R R M V G G Q

10951 GAAGACATGATCGTGGATTTGCATATGATGTCTAGAAAAACACAGGGAACTAJGCGTGACGTGATCTCCCACTAGGTCGATTTCTCGATGTTTGGTGCTTCGCGGATACCTCGAGGCACTTATACCAA
E D M I V D V A L D M M S R K P Q G T M R D V I S H

11101 GAGCTTATGTGTCTCTCGTGTGGTTTAGTGGGGTGAAAGCACTGGGTAGTGTGGCTAGGTTCTGTAATTATTCTGTGGTGAGCGGTTATCATGGCCCCGGTCTAGTGAAGCACTCCAAAAATGTGCACTGTATCTGCGTTGCAATGG

11251 AAGTAAGCAG

FIG. 8—Continued.

it is also subject to slow spontaneous elimination. No sequence data are available for these other decarboxylating systems.

The *p*-cumate pathway decarboxylase product 2-hydroxy-6-oxo-7-methylocta-2,4-dienoate is a typical *meta*-cleavage pathway intermediate. It is identical to the ring cleavage product formed from 3-isopropylcatechol in the isopropylbenzene catabolic pathway (26) and is an analog of products formed by dioxygenase-catalyzed cleavage of other 3-substituted catechols (35, 76). The product of its hydrolysis, 2-hydroxypenta-2,4-dienoate, and the subsequent intermediates and enzymes of the *p*-cumate pathway are common to a variety of aromatic *meta*-cleavage pathways; the enzymes and the genes that encode them show a relatively high degree of similarity across these pathways. This and the lower-level but significant similarity of amino acid sequences of enzymes catalyzing early reactions of the *p*-cumate pathway to amino acid sequences of enzymes catalyzing corresponding reactions in other aromatic catabolic pathways suggest that *p*-cumate and aromatic hydrocarbon catabolic pathways have common evolutionary origins.

It has been proposed (47, 91) that most catabolic genes are clustered in limited regions of the chromosomes of *Pseudomonas* species (supraoperonic clustering). While there is currently insufficient evidence to confirm or refute this, the finding that the *tod* operon is only 2.8 kb downstream from and in the same orientation as the *cmt* operon must be considered to support this hypothesis. Addition of nonessential genes to a limited region of the chromosome could have the selective advantage that comes from the acquisition of new genetic material without disruption of essential genes. Clustering of catabolic genes could be accomplished by site-specific recombination events promoted by such DNA elements as integrons (40), catabolic plasmids (47), and catabolic transposons (96).

The genetic stability of the *tod* and *cmt* operons is of interest. While there is not a high level of homology overall, the genes encoding the acetaldehyde dehydrogenases and 4-hydroxy-2-oxovalerate aldolases of the *cmt* and *tod* operons (*cmtHG* and *todIH*) have long stretches of nearly perfect homology (the longest sequence of perfect homology is 19 bp). Deletions of

about 14.1 kb, encompassing most of the *tod* operon, caused by homologous recombination between these genes appear to be likely if infrequent events. Spontaneous deletions of the *tod* operon may be responsible for the nonreverting mutations observed in some derivatives of strain F1 which lack multiple components of the toluene catabolic pathway (31, 102).

# ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I thank Peter Chapman, whose studies of biotransformations by *P. putida* F1 led to the research described here, for valuable discussions. Wally Gilliam of this laboratory provided GC-MS analyses. Most of the DNA sequence data presented here were supplied by National Biosciences, Inc. (Brian Hoffman, director); the remainder were contributed by the DNA Sequencing Core Laboratory, ICBR, University of Florida (Ernesto Almira, director). Peter Chapman and Richard Devereux provided critical readings of the manuscript. I appreciate their help.

# REFERENCES

1. Alting-Mees, M. A., and J. M. Short. 1989. pBluescript II: gene mapping vectors. Nucleic Acids Res. **17**:9494.
2. Altschul, S. F., W. Gish, W. Miller, E. W. Myers, and D. J. Lipman. 1990. Basic local alignment search tool. J. Mol. Biol. **215**:403–410.
3. Assinder, S. J., and P. A. Williams. 1990. The TOL plasmids: determinants of the catabolism of toluene and the xylenes. Adv. Microb. Physiol. **31**:1–69.
4. Asturias, J. A., E. Diaz, and K. N. Timmis. 1995. Evolutionary relationship of the biphenyl dioxygenase of the gram-positive bacterium *Rhodococcus* P6 to multicomponent dioxygenases of gram-negative bacteria. Gene **156**:11–18.
5. Asturias, J. A., L. D. Eltis, M. Prucha, and K. N. Timmis. 1994. Analysis of three 2,3-dihydroxybiphenyl 1,2-dioxygenases found in *Rhodococcus globerulus* P6: identification of a new family of extradiol dioxygenases. J. Biol. Chem. **269**:7807–7815.
6. Barnsley, E. A. 1988. Metabolism of 2,6-dimethyl-naphthalene by flavobacteria. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. **54**:428–433.
7. Benson, D., D. J. Lipman, and J. Ostell. 1993. GenBank. Nucleic Acids Res. **21**:2963–2965.
8. Chapman, P. J. Personal communication.
9. Collingsworth, W. I., P. J. Chapman, and S. Dagley. 1973. Stereospecific enzymes in the degradation of aromatic compounds by *Pseudomonas putida*. J. Bacteriol. **113**:922–931.
10. Crawford, R. L., J. W. Bromley, and P. E. Perkins-Olson. 1979. Catabolism of protocatechuate by *Bacillus macerans*. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. **37**:614–618.
11. Dagley, S., and M. D. Patel. 1957. Oxidation of *p*-cresol and related compounds by a *Pseudomonas*. Biochem. J. **66**:227–233.
12. Danganen, C., R. Ye, D. Daubaras, L. Xun, and A. Chakrabarty. 1994. Nucleotide sequence and functional analysis of the genes encoding 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid oxygenase in *Pseudomonas cepacia* AC1100. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. **60**:4100–4106.
13. Davis, J. B., and R. L. Raymond. 1961. Oxidation of alkyl-substituted cyclic hydrocarbons by a *Nocardia* sp. during growth on *n*-alkanes. Appl. Microbiol. **9**:383–388.
14. Davis, R. W., D. Botstein, and J. R. Roth. 1980. Advanced bacterial genetics. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.
15. DeFrank, J. J., and D. W. Ribbons. 1976. The *p*-cymene pathway in *Pseudomonas putida* PL: isolation of a dihydrodiol accumulated by a mutant. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. **70**:1129–1135.
16. DeFrank, J. J., and D. W. Ribbons. 1977. *p*-Cymene pathway in *Pseudomonas putida*: initial reactions. J. Bacteriol. **168**:1356–1364.
17. DeFrank, J. J., and D. W. Ribbons. 1977. *p*-Cymene pathway in *Pseudomonas putida*: ring cleavage of 2,3-dihydroxy-*p*-cumate and subsequent reactions. J. Bacteriol. **129**:1365–1374.
18. Ditta, G., S. Stanfield, D. Corbin, and D. Helinski. 1980. Broad host range DNA cloning system for gram-negative bacteria: construction of a gene bank of *Rhizobium meliloti*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **77**:7347–7351.
19. Dretzen, G., M. Bellard, P. Sassone-Corsi, and P. Chambon. 1981. A reliable method for the recovery of DNA fragments from agarose and acrylamide gels. Anal. Biochem. **112**:295–298.
20. Eaton, R. W. 1994. Organization and evolution of naphthalene catabolic pathways: sequence of the DNA encoding 2-hydroxychromene-2-carboxylate isomerase and *trans-o*-hydroxybenzylidenepyruvate hydratase-aldolase from the NAH7 plasmid. J. Bacteriol. **176**:7757–7762.
21. Eaton, R. W. Unpublished observation.
22. Eaton, R. W., and P. J. Chapman. 1992. Bacterial metabolism of naphthalene: construction and use of recombinant bacteria to study ring cleavage of 1,2-dihydroxynaphthalene and subsequent reactions. J. Bacteriol. **174**:7542–7554.
23. Eaton, R. W., and P. J. Chapman. 1995. Formation of indigo and related compounds from indolecarboxylic acids by aromatic acid-degrading bacteria: chromogenic reactions for cloning genes encoding dioxygenases that act on aromatic acids. J. Bacteriol. **177**:6983–6988.
24. Eaton, R. W., and J. S. Karns. 1991. Cloning and analysis of *s*-triazine catabolic genes from *Pseudomonas* sp. strain NRRLB-12227. J. Bacteriol. **173**:1215–1222.
25. Eaton, R. W., and D. W. Ribbons. 1982. Metabolism of dibutylphthalate and phthalate by *Micrococcus* sp. strain 12B. J. Bacteriol. **151**:48–57.
26. Eaton, R. W., and K. N. Timmis. 1986. Characterization of a plasmid-specified pathway for catabolism of isopropylbenzene in *Pseudomonas putida* RE204. J. Bacteriol. **168**:123–131.
27. Engesser, K. H., M. A. Rubio, and D. W. Ribbons. 1988. Bacterial metabolism of side chain fluorinated aromatics: cometabolism of 4-trifluoromethyl(TFM)-benzoate by 4-isopropylbenzoate grown *Pseudomonas putida* JT strains. Arch. Microbiol. **149**:198–206.
28. Ensley, B. D., B. J. Ratzken, T. D. Osslund, M. J. Simon, L. P. Wackett, and D. T. Gibson. 1983. Expression of naphthalene oxidation genes in *Escherichia coli* results in the biosynthesis of indigo. Science **222**:167–169.
29. Erickson, B. D. 1993. Unpublished DNA sequence, GenBank accession number M86348.
30. Erickson, B. D., and F. J. Mondello. 1992. Nucleotide sequencing and transcriptional mapping of genes encoding biphenyl dioxygenase, a multi-component PCB-degrading enzyme in *Pseudomonas* sp. strain LB400. J. Bacteriol. **174**:2903–2912.
31. Finette, B. A., V. Subramanian, and D. T. Gibson. 1984. Isolation and characterization of *Pseudomonas putida* PpF1 mutants defective in the toluene dioxygenase enzyme system. J. Bacteriol. **160**:1003–1009.
32. Fukuda, M., Y. Yasukochi, Y. Kikuchi, Y. Nagata, K. Kimbara, H. Horiuchi, M. Takagi, and K. Yano. 1994. Identification of the *bphA* and *bphB* genes of *Pseudomonas* sp. strain KKS102 involved in degradation of biphenyl and polychlorinated biphenyls. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. **202**:850–856.
33. Gibson, D. T., M. Hensley, H. Yoshioka, and T. J. Mabry. 1970. Formation of (+)-cis-2,3-dihydroxy-1-methylcyclohexa-4,6-diene from toluene by *Pseudomonas putida*. Biochemistry **9**:1626–1630.
34. Gibson, D. T., J. R. Koch, and R. E. Kallio. 1968. Oxidative degradation of aromatic hydrocarbons by microorganisms. I. Enzymatic formation of catechol from benzene. Biochemistry **7**:2653–2662.
35. Gibson, D. T., and V. Subramanian. 1984. Microbial degradation of aromatic hydrocarbons, p. 181–252. In D. T. Gibson (ed.), Microbial degradation of organic compounds. Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York.
36. Gildemeister, E., and F. Hoffmann. 1960. Aromatische kohlenwasserstoffe: (a) Benzoide aromaten, *p*-Cymol, p. 402–411. In Die ätherischen Öle, vol. IIIa. Akademie-Verlag, Berlin.
37. Gold, L. 1988. Posttranslational regulatory mechanisms in *Escherichia coli*. Annu. Rev. Biochem. **57**:199–233.
38. Grunstein, M., and D. Hogness. 1975. Colony hybridization: a method for the isolation of cloned DNAs that contain a specific gene. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **72**:3961–3965.
39. Guerry, P., J. Van Embden, and S. Falkow. 1974. Molecular nature of two non-conjugative plasmids carrying drug resistance genes. J. Bacteriol. **117**:619–630.
40. Hall, R. M., and H. W. Stokes. 1993. Integrons: novel DNA elements which capture genes by site-specific recombination. Genetica **90**:115–132.
41. Harayama, S., and M. Rekik. 1993. Comparison of the nucleotide sequences of the meta-cleavage genes of TOL plasmid pWW0 from *Pseudomonas putida* with other meta-cleavage genes suggests that both single and multiple nucleotide substitutions contribute to enzyme evolution. Mol. Gen. Genet. **239**:81–89.
42. Harayama, S., M. Rekik, A. Bairoch, E. L. Neidle, and L. N. Ornston. 1991. Potential DNA slippage structures acquired during divergence of *Acinetobacter calcoaceticus* chromosomal and *Pseudomonas putida* TOL pWW0 plasmid *xylXYZ* genes, encoding benzoate dioxygenases. J. Bacteriol. **173**:7540–7548.
43. Harayama, S., M. Rekik, M. Wubbolts, K. Rose, R. A. Leppik, and K. N. Timmis. 1989. Characterization of five genes in the upper-pathway operon of TOL plasmid pWW0 from *Pseudomonas putida* and identification of the gene products. J. Bacteriol. **171**:5048–5055.
44. Harley, C. B., and R. P. Reynolds. 1987. Analysis of *E. coli* promoter sequences. Nucleic Acids Res. **15**:2347–2351.
45. Hayase, N., K. Taira, and K. Furukawa. 1990. *Pseudomonas putida* KF715 *bph ABCD* operon encoding biphenyl and polychlorinated biphenyl degradation: cloning, analysis, and expression in soil bacteria. J. Bacteriol. **172**:1160–1164.
46. Hofer, B., S. Backhaus, and K. N. Timmis. 1994. The biphenyl/polychlorinated biphenyl degradation locus (*bph*) of *Pseudomonas* sp. LB400 encodes four additional metabolic enzymes. Gene **144**:9–16.
47. Holloway, B. W., and A. F. Morgan. 1986. Genome organization in *Pseudomonas*. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. **40**:79–105.
48. Huang, M., F. B. Opperman, and A. Steinbuchel. 1994. Molecular characterization of the *Pseudomonas putida* 2,3-butanediol catabolic pathway. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. **124**:141–150.
49. Kabisch, M., and P. Fortnagel. 1990. Nucleotide sequence of the metapyrocatechase II (catechol 2,3-oxygenase II) gene *mpcII* from *Alcaligenes eutrophus* JMP222. Nucleic Acids Res. **18**:5543.
50. Keil, H., C. M. Saint, and P. A. Williams. 1987. Gene organization of the first catabolic operon of TOL plasmid pWW53: production of indigo by the *xylA* gene product. J. Bacteriol. **169**:764–770.
51. Kikuchi, Y., Y. Yasukochi, Y. Nagata, M. Fukuda, and M. Takagi. 1994. Nucleotide sequence and functional analysis of the meta-cleavage pathway

involved in biphenyl and polychlorinated biphenyl degradation in *Pseudomonas* sp. strain KKS102. J. Bacteriol. **176**:4269–4276.

52. Kim, E., and G. J. Zylstra. 1995. Molecular and biochemical characterization of two meta-cleavage dioxygenases involved in biphenyl and *m*-xylene degradation by *Beijerinckia* sp. strain B1. J. Bacteriol. **177**:3095–3103.

53. Koga, H., E. Yamaguchi, K. Matsunaga, H. Aramaki, and T. Horiuchi. 1989. Cloning and nucleotide sequences of NADH-putidaredoxin reductase gene (*camA*) and putidaredoxin gene (*camB*) involved in P-450cam hydroxylase of *Pseudomonas putida*. J. Biochem. **106**:831–836.

54. Lau, P. C. K., H. Bergeron, D. Labbé, Y. Wang, R. Brousseau, and D. T. Gibson. 1994. Sequence and expression of the *todGIH* genes involved in the last three steps of toluene degradation by *Pseudomonas putida* F1. Gene **146**:7–13.

55. Leavitt, R. I. 1967. Microbial oxidation of hydrocarbons:oxidation of *p*-isopropyltoluene by a *Pseudomonas* sp. J. Gen. Microbiol. **49**:411–420.

56. Liebergesell, M., and A. Steinbuchel. 1992. Cloning and nucleotide sequences of genes relevant for biosynthesis of poly(3-hydroxybutyric acid) in *Chromatium vinosum* strain D. Eur. J. Biochem. **209**:135–150.

57. Madhyastha, K. M., and P. K. Bhattacharya. 1968. Microbiological transformations of terpenes. XII. Fermentation of *p*-cymene by a soil pseudomonad (PL-strain). Indian J. Biochem. **5**:102–111.

58. Madhyastha, K. M., P. N. Rangachari, M. R. Rao, and P. K. Bhattacharya. 1968. Microbiological transformations of terpenes. XV. Enzyme systems in the catabolism of *p*-cymene in PL-strain. Indian J. Biochem. **5**:167–173.

59. Marcotte, P., and C. Walsh. 1978. Sequence of reactions which follows enzymatic oxidation of allylglycine. Biochemistry **17**:5620–5626.

60. Mason, J. R., and R. Cammack. 1992. The electron-transport proteins of hydroxylating bacterial dioxygenases. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. **46**:277–305.

61. Menn, F.-M., G. J. Zylstra, and D. T. Gibson. 1991. Location and sequence of the *todF* gene encoding 2-hydroxy-6-oxohepta-2,4-dienoate hydrolase in *Pseudomonas putida* F1. Gene **104**:91–94.

62. Mermod, N., S. Harayama, and K. N. Timmis. 1986. New route to bacterial production of indigo. Biotechnology **4**:321–324.

63. Miyachi, N., T. Tanaka, T. Suzuki, Y. Hotta, and T. Omori. 1993. Microbial oxidation of dimethylnaphthalene isomers. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. **59**:1504–1506.

64. Mondello, F. J. 1989. Cloning and expression in *Escherichia coli* of *Pseudomonas* sp. strain LB400 genes encoding polychlorinated biphenyl degradation. J. Bacteriol. **171**:1725–1732.

65. Morales, V. M., A. Bäckman, and M. Bagdasarian. 1991. A series of wide-host-range low-copy-number vectors that allow direct screening for recombinants. Gene **97**:39–47.

66. Nagy, I., G. Schoofs, F. Compernolle, P. Proost, J. Vanderleyden, and R. De Mot. 1995. Degradation of the thiocarbamate herbicide EPTC (*S*-ethyl di-propylcarbamothioate) and biosafening by *Rhodococcus* sp. strain NI86/21 involve an inducible cytochrome P-450 system and aldehyde dehydrogenase. J. Bacteriol. **177**:676–687.

67. Needleman, S. B., and C. D. Wunsch. 1970. A general method applicable to the search for similarities in the amino acid sequence of two proteins. J. Mol. Biol. **48**:443–453.

68. Neidle, E. L., C. Hartnett, L. N. Ornston, A. Bairoch, M. Rekik, and S. Harayama. 1991. Nucleotide sequences of the *Acinetobacter calcoaceticus benABC* genes for benzoate 1,2-dioxygenase reveal evolutionary relationships among multicomponent oxygenases. J. Bacteriol. **173**:5385–5395.

69. Ninnekar, H. Z. 1992. Purification and properties of 2,3-dihydroxy-*p*-cumate-3,4-dioxygenase from *Bacillus* species. Biochem. Int. **28**:97–103.

70. Nordlund, I., and V. Shingler. 1990. Nucleotide sequences of the meta-cleavage pathway enzymes 2-hydroxymuconic semialdehyde dehydrogenase and 2-hydroxymuconic semialdehyde hydrolase from *Pseudomonas* CF600. Biochim. Biophys. Acta **1049**:227–230.

71. O’Connor, C. D., and G. O. Humphries. 1982. Expression of the *EcoRI* restriction-modification system and the construction of positive-selection cloning vectors. Gene **20**:219–229.

72. Powłowski, J., L. Sahlman, and V. Shingler. 1993. Purification and properties of the physically associated *meta*-cleavage pathway enzymes 4-hydroxy-2-ketovalerate aldolase and aldehyde dehydrogenase (acylating) from *Pseudomonas* sp. strain CF600. J. Bacteriol. **175**:377–385.

73. Priefert, H., S. Hein, N. Krueger, K. Zeh, B. Schmidt, and A. Steinbüchel. 1991. Identification and molecular characterization of the *Alcaligenes eutrophus H16 aco* operon genes involved in acetoin catabolism. J. Bacteriol. **173**:4056–4071.

74. Radke, M. 1987. Organic geochemistry of aromatic hydrocarbons. Adv. Petrol. Geochem. **2**:141–207.

75. Raymond, R. L., V. W. Jamison, and J. O. Hudson. 1967. Microbial hydrocarbon cooxidation. I. Oxidation of mono- and dicyclic hydrocarbons by soil isolates of the genus *Nocardia*. Appl. Microbiol. **15**:857–865.

76. Ribbons, D. W., and R. W. Eaton. 1982. Chemical transformations of aromatic hydrocarbons that support the growth of microorganisms, p. 59–

84. In A. M. Chakrabarty (ed.), Biodegradation and detoxification of environmental pollutants. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Fla.

77. Ribbons, D. W., P. Keyser, D. A. Kunz, B. F. Taylor, R. W. Eaton, and B. N. Anderson. 1984. Microbial degradation of phthalates, p. 371–397. In D. T. Gibson (ed.), Microbial degradation of organic compounds. Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York.

78. Royle, P. L., H. Matsumoto, and B. W. Holloway. 1981. Genetic circularity of the *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* PAO chromosome. J. Bacteriol. **145**:145–155.

79. Saint, C. P., and P. Boutakis. 1995. Unpublished DNA sequence, GenBank accession number U29532.

80. Sanger, F., S. Nicklen, and A. R. Coulson. 1977. DNA sequencing with chain-terminating inhibitors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **74**:5463–5467.

81. Selifonov, S. A., and R. W. Eaton. Unpublished data.

82. Sherman, D. H., F. Malpartida, M. J. Bibb, H. M. Kieser, M. J. Bibb, and D. A. Hopwood. 1989. Structure and deduced function of the granaticin-producing polyketide synthase gene cluster of *Streptomyces violaceoruber* Tu22. EMBO J. **8**:2717–2725.

83. Shingler, V., J. Powłowski, and U. Marklund. 1992. Nucleotide sequence and functional analysis of the complete phenol/3,4-dimethylphenol metabolic pathway of *Pseudomonas* sp. strain CF600. J. Bacteriol. **174**:711–724.

84. Suzuki, M., T. Hayakawa, J. P. Shaw, M. Rekik, and S. Harayama. 1991. Primary structure of xylene monooxygenase:similarities to and differences from the alkane hydroxylation system. J. Bacteriol. **173**:1690–1695.

85. Taira, K., J. Hirose, S. Hagashida, and K. Furukawa. 1992. Analysis of *bph* operon from the polychlorinated biphenyl-degrading strain of *Pseudomonas pseudoalcaligenes* KF707. J. Biol. Chem. **267**:4844–4853.

86. Tan, H. M., H. Y. Tang, C. L. Joannou, N. H. Abdel-Wahab, and J. R. Mason. 1993. The *Pseudomonas putida* ML2 plasmid-encoded genes for benzene dioxygenase are unusual in codon usage and low in G+C content. Gene **130**:33–39.

87. Taylor, S. J. C., D. W. Ribbons, A. M. Z. Slawin, D. A. Widadowson, and D. J. Williams. 1987. Biochemically generated chiral intermediates for organic synthesis:the absolute stereochemistry of 4-bromo-cis-2,3-dihydroxycyclohexa-4,6-diene-1-carboxylic acid formed from 4-bromobenzoic acid by a mutant of *Pseudomonas putida*. Tetrahedron Lett. **28**:6391–6392.

88. Thöny, B., and H. Hennecke. 1989. The −24/−12 promoter comes of age. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. **63**:341–358.

89. Wang, Y., M. Rawlings, D. T. Gibson, D. Labbé, H. Bergeron, R. Brousseau, and P. C. K. Lau. 1995. Identification of a membrane protein and a truncated LysR-type regulator associated with the toluene degradation pathway in *Pseudomonas putida* F1. Mol. Gen. Genet. **246**:570–579.

90. Werlen, C., and J. R. Van der Meer. 1994. Unpublished DNA sequence, GenBank accession number U15298.

91. Wheelis, M. L. 1975. The genetics of dissimilarity pathways in *Pseudomonas*. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. **29**:505–524.

92. Wierenga, R. K., P. Terpstra, and W. G. J. Hol. 1986. Prediction of the occurrence of the ADP-binding βαβ-fold in proteins, using an amino acid sequence fingerprint. J. Mol. Biol. **187**:101–107.

93. Wigmore, G. J., and D. W. Ribbons. 1980. *p*-Cymene pathway in *Pseudomonas putida*:selective enrichment of defective mutants by using halogenated substrate analogs. J. Bacteriol. **143**:816–824.

94. Wigmore, G. J., A. J. Smith, and D. W. Ribbons. 1977. Metabolism of para-substituted benzoates and toluenes with “2,3-dihydroxybenzoates” as ring cleavage substrates, abstr. K-188. In Abstracts of the 77th General Meeting of the American Society for Microbiology 1977. American Society for Microbiology, Washington, D.C.

95. Wilbur, W. J., and D. J. Lipman. 1983. Rapid similarity searches of nucleic acid and protein data banks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **80**:726–730.

96. Wyndham, R. C., A. E. Cashore, C. H. Nakatsu, and M. Peel. 1994. Catabolic transposons. Biodegradation **5**:323–342.

97. Yamada, K., S. Horiguchi, and J. Takahashi. 1965. Studies on the utilization of hydrocarbons by microorganisms. VI. Screening of aromatic hydrocarbon-utilizing microorganisms and cumic acid formation from *p*-cymene. Agric. Biol. Chem. **29**:943.

98. Yanisch-Perron, C., J. Vieira, and J. Messing. 1985. Improved M13 phage cloning vectors and host strains:nucleotide sequences of the M13mp18 and pUC19 vectors. Gene **33**:103–119.

99. Yeh, W. K., D. T. Gibson, and T.-N. Liu. 1977. Toluene dioxygenase:a multi-component enzyme system. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. **78**:401–410.

100. Ziffer, H., D. M. Jerina, D. T. Gibson, and V. M. Kobal. 1973. Absolute stereochemistry of the (+)*cis*-1,2-dihydroxy-3-methylcyclohexa-3,5-diene produced from toluene by *Pseudomonas putida*. J. Am. Chem. Soc. **95**:4048–4049.

101. Zylstra, G. J., and D. T. Gibson. 1989. Toluene degradation by *Pseudomonas putida* F1:nucleotide sequence of the *todC1C2BADE* genes and their expression in *Escherichia coli*. J. Biol. Chem. **264**:14940–14946.

102. Zylstra, G. J., W. R. McCombie, D. T. Gibson, and B. A. Finette. 1988. Toluene degradation by *Pseudomonas putida* F1:genetic organization of the *tod* operon. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. **54**:1498–1503.
