
Degradative pathways for  
$p$-toluenecarboxylate and $p$-toluenesulfonate  
and their multicomponent oxygenases in  
Comamonas testosteronei strains PSB-4 and T-2  

Frank Junker,$^{1}$ Elisabeth Saller,$^{1\dagger}$ Hans R. Schläfli Oppenberg,$^{1\ddagger}$  
Peter M. H. Kroneck,$^{2}$ Thomas Leisinger$^{1}$ and Alasdair M. Cook$^{1,2}$  

Author for correspondence: Alasdair Cook. Tel: +49 7531 88 4247. Fax: +49 7531 88 2966.  
e-mail: Alasdair.Cook@uni-konstanz.de  

$^{1}$ Microbiology Institute,  
Swiss Federal Institute of  
Technology, ETH-Zentrum,  
CH-8092 Zürich,  
Switzerland  

$^{2}$ Fakultät für Biologie der  
Universität, Postfach 5560,  
D-78434 Konstanz,  
Germany  

Three multicomponent oxygenases involved in the degradation of $p$-  
toluenesulfonate and $p$-toluenecarboxylate and the regulation of their  
synthesis have been examined in three strains (T-2, PSB-4 and TER-1) of  
Comamonas testosteronei. Strain T-2 utilizes $p$-toluenesulfonate as a source of  
carbon and energy for growth via $p$-sulfobenzoate and protocatechuate, and $p$-  
toluenecarboxylate via terephthalate and protocatechuate, and has the  
unusual property of requiring the reductase (TsaB) of the toluenesulfonate  
methyl monooxygenase system (TsaMB) in an incompletely expressed  
sulfobenzoate dioxygenase system (PsbAC) [Schläfli Oppenberg, H. R., Chen, G.,  
Leisinger, T. & Cook, A. M. (1995). Microbiology 141, 1891–1899]. The  
independently isolated C. testosteronei PSB-4 utilized only sulfobenzoate and  
terephthalate via protocatechuate. Mutant TER-1, derived from strain T-2,  
utilized only terephthalate via protocatechuate. We detected no enzymes of  
the pathway from toluenesulfonate to sulfobenzoate in strains PSB-4 and TER-  
1, and confirmed by PCR and Southern blot analysis that the genes (tsaMB)  
encoding toluenesulfonate monooxygenase were absent. We concluded that,  
in strain PSB-4, the regulatory unit encoding the genes for the conversion of  
toluenesulfonate to sulfobenzoate was missing, and that generation of mutant  
TER-1 involved deletion of this regulatory unit and of the regulatory unit  
encoding desulfonation of sulfobenzoate. The degradation of sulfobenzoate in  
strain PSB-4 was catalysed by a fully inducible sulfobenzoate dioxygenase  
system (PsbAC$_{\text{PSB-4}}$), which, after purification of the oxygenase component  
(PsbA$_{\text{PSB-4}}$), turned out to be indistinguishable from the corresponding  
component from strain T-2 (PsbA$_{\text{T-2}}$). Reductase PsbC$_{\text{PSB-4}}$, which we could  
separate but not purify, was active with oxygenase PsbA$_{\text{PSB-4}}$ and PsbA$_{\text{T-2}}$.  
Oxygenase PsbA$_{\text{PSB-4}}$ was shown by electron paramagnetic resonance  
spectroscopy to contain a Rieske [2Fe-2S] centre. The enzyme system  
oxygenating terephthalate was examined and the oxygenase component  
purified and characterized. The oxygenase component in strains T-2 (and  
mutant TER-1) and PSB-4 were indistinguishable. The reductase component,  
which we separated but failed to purify, was active with the oxygenase from  
all strains. Gains and losses of blocks of genes in evolution is discussed.  

Keywords: *Comamonas testosteronei*, terephthalate dioxygenase system, $p$-sulfobenzoate  
dioxygenase system, identical enzymes  

$\dagger$ Present address: ISREC, Ch. des Boveresses, CH-1066 Epalinges, Switzerland.  
$\ddagger$ Present address: Fa. Paul Bucher, CH-4051 Basel, Switzerland.  

Abbreviations: PcaP, protocatechuate 4,5-dioxygenase; PsbAC, $p$-sulfobenzoate dioxygenase system comprising a reductase component (PsbC) and an  
oxygenase component (PsbA); TerZ$\alpha$$\beta$R, terephthalate dioxygenase system comprising a reductase component (TerR) and a two-subunit oxygenase  
component (TerZ$\alpha$$\beta$); TsaC, sulfobenzyl alcohol dehydrogenase; TsaD, sulfobenzaldehyde dehydrogenase; TsaMB, $p$-toluenesulfonate methyl mono-  
oxygenase system comprising a reductase component (TsaB) and an oxygenase component (TsaM).

F. JUNKER and OTHERS

# INTRODUCTION

The degradation of *p*-toluenesulfonate and *p*-toluene- carboxylate (*p*-toluate) to protocatechuate in *Comamonas testosteronei* T-2 proceeds via *p*-sulfobenzoate and tere- phthalate, respectively (Fig. 1). Most of the enzymes have been purified (Locher et al., 1991a, b, c; Saller et al., 1995; Schläfli et al., 1994), the physiology of their regulation examined (Schläfli Oppenberg et al., 1995) and the genes encoding the toluenesulfonate monooxygenase system sequenced (F. Junker & R. Kiewitz, unpublished).

The degradative pathway(s) for toluenesulfonate and toluenecarboxylate in strain T-2 is unusual in that, in addition to the characteristic convergence (e.g. Fewson, 1981; Stanier & Ornston, 1973) at the ring cleavage substrate, protocatechuate, the initial degradative en- zymes only are shared, with the consequence that the pathway includes a divergence. In contrast to the di- vergence in the meta pathway encoded on the TOL plasmid (Assinder & Williams, 1990), the branches of the divergence (Fig. 1) are separately regulated (Schläfli Oppenberg et al., 1995). A further unusual phenomenon in strain T-2 is the sharing of a reductase (TsaB) between two class IA oxygenase systems [*p*-toluenesulfonate methyl monooxygenase (TsaMB) and *p*-sulfobenzoate dioxygenase (PsbAC)] (cf. Batie et al., 1992), whereby the loss of a reductase (PsbC) over time is suspected (Schläfli Oppenberg et al., 1995). Concomitant with this sharing of a reductase, the oxygenase component, PsbA, of oxy- genase system PsbAC is synthesized constitutively under most conditions (Schläfli Oppenberg et al., 1995).

A second, independently isolated organism, *C*. *testosteroni* PSB-4, is able to utilize sulfobenzoate, though not toluenesulfonate (Busse et al., 1992; Thurnheer et al., 1986). Given the similarities sometimes observed amongst multicomponent oxygenases of the same function from different organisms (Furukawa et al., 1993; Harayama et al., 1992), contrasted with the loss of one reductase component from strain T-2 (Schläfli Oppenberg et al., 1995), we decided to compare and contrast aromatic metabolism and its regulation in strains T-2 and PSB-4.

A third organism became available to us from work with strain T-2 in a chemostat. A. J. Tien & T. Egli (EAWAG, Switzerland, personal communication) obtained a mutant which metabolized neither toluenesulfonate nor sulfo- benzoate, but retained the ability to utilize terephthalate, and we termed the mutant TER-1. We wanted to ascertain whether deletion or regulatory mutants were involved.

We now confirm that strain PSB-4 lacks the genes (*tsaMB*) for the TsaMB system and that there is high similarity between the PsbAC systems found in strains T-2 and PSB- 4, and that there is high similarity among the components of terephthalate dioxygenase (TerZαβR) in all organisms tested. Mutant TER-1 seems to have arisen by deletion of genetic material.

## METHODS

### Materials

Polyvalent antibodies from rabbit serum were prepared previously (Schläfli et al., 1994; Schläfli Oppenberg et al., 1995). Chemicals were of the highest purity available commercially (Locher et al., 1989, 1991a; Saller et al., 1995; Schläfli et al., 1994, 1995; Schläfli Oppenberg et al., 1995). Materials and apparatus for the purification and characterization of proteins are described elsewhere (Locher et al., 1991a; Schläfli et al., 1994).

### Organisms, growth and the preparation of cell-free extracts

*C*. *testosteroni* PSB-4 and *C*. *testosteroni* T-2 (DSM 6577) were isolated by Thurnheer et al. (1986) and identified by Busse et al. (1992). *C*. *testosteroni* TER-1 was isolated by A. J. Tien & T. Egli (personal communication). Cells were grown in mineral salts medium containing 6 mM sulfobenzoate or terephthalate as described elsewhere (Locher et al., 1991a; Schläfli et al., 1994). On occasion, medium was supplemented with sterile tolue- sulfonate or sulfobenzoate to a final concentration of 3 mM.
Cultures were harvested at mid-exponential growth phase (about 160 mg protein l⁻¹), and the cell pellets frozen at –20 °C or used immediately. Cell suspensions were disrupted in a French pressure cell and the supernatant fluid after centrifugation was used for the experiments (Locher *et al.*, 1991a; Schläfli *et al.*, 1994).

**Analytical methods.** Oxygenase system PsbAC or oxygenase system TerZαβR was assayed as substrate-dependent oxygen uptake in a Clark-type oxygen electrode (Locher *et al.*, 1991a; Schläfli *et al.*, 1994). NADH reductase activity was assayed photometrically as NADH-dependent reduction of dichlorophenolindophenol (DCPIP) or cytochrome c (Locher *et al.*, 1991a). TsaC was assayed photometrically as the NADH-dependent reduction of carboxybenzaldehyde, and sulfo-benzaldehyde dehydrogenase (TsaD) was assayed as the NAD-dependent oxidation of carboxybenzaldehyde (Locher *et al.*, 1991c). Products of enzyme reactions were identified (co-chromatography) and quantified by reversed-phase HPLC at room temperature (Locher *et al.*, 1991a, c; Schläfli *et al.*, 1994). UV spectra of separated reaction products were determined in a diode-array detector (Locher *et al.*, 1991a). SDS-PAGE was used to determine *M*~r~ values of proteins under denaturing conditions and to monitor protein purifications. Proteins in gels were visualized by staining with Coomassie brilliant blue (Laemmli, 1970) or with silver nitrate (Bloom *et al.*, 1987). Proteins separated by SDS-PAGE were sometimes electroblotted onto nitrocellulose membranes (Schläfli Oppenberg *et al.*, 1995). Affinity-purified antisera raised against oxygenase component PsbA~T-2~ of oxygenase system PsbAC~T-2~, against component TsaB of oxygenase system TsaMB, and against oxygenase subunit TerZα of oxygenase system TerZαβR~T-2~ were used to detect cross-reacting proteins from *C.* *testosteroni* PSB-4 in blotted extracts and in fractions of purified enzymes (Schläfli Oppenberg *et al.*, 1995). Reductase TsaB was prepared as described elsewhere (Locher *et al.*, 1991a). Protein concentration was measured by the method of Bradford (1976) with bovine serum albumin as standard. Growth was assayed as OD~546~ (an OD~546~ of 1·0 represented 200 mg protein l⁻¹). The N-terminal amino acid sequences were determined as described elsewhere (Schläfli *et al.*, 1994). EPR spectra of a component (about 2 mg in 0·3 ml) at X band were recorded with an EPR 300 instrument (Bruker) at 10 K as described elsewhere (Riester *et al.*, 1989).

**PCR-analysis of tsaMB and Southern blot hybridization.** PCR reactions with total DNA of strain T-2, PSB-4 and TER-1 were done to assay for the presence of *tsaMB* genes encoding TsaMB (F. Junker & R. Kiewitz, unpublished). Total DNA from 100 ml batch cultures (200 mg protein l⁻¹) of all three strains was prepared by the cetyltrimethylammonium bromide precipitation method (Ausubel *et al.*, 1987). The PCR mixture (50 μl) contained 10 ng DNA, 200 μM each dNTP, 50 pmol each primer, 5 μl DMSO and 0·25 units Super*Taq* (Stehelin & Cie) in the buffer supplied by the manufacturer. The PCR conditions were: 95 °C for 5 min, 45 °C for 30 s, 72 °C for 10 s, 94 °C for 30 s. The last three steps were repeated 30 times. The following primers (F. Junker & R. Kiewitz, unpublished) were used: 5′ AAAAATCTTGAGCCAGGT 3′ (sense strand of *tsaM*) and 5′ TTGAGCTTTTCGTGAATC 3′ (antisense strand of *tsaB*). The size of the expected product is 386 bp. The PCR product or total DNA digested with *PstI* was separated on a 1·4% agarose gel. The DNA was blotted on to a Hybond-N nylon membrane (Amersham International) and hybridized with 5′ end-labelled γ[³²P]dATP oligonucleotide probes (primers for *tsaM* and *tsaB* used for PCR reaction) (Ausubel *et al.*, 1987).

---

**p-Sulfobenzoate and terephthalate dioxygenases**

**Purification of oxygenase system PsbAC from strain PSB-4 or T-2.** Oxygenase system PsbAC~PSB-4~ or PsbAC~T-2~ was purified from sulfobenzoate-grown cells. Crude extracts free of nucleic acids were chromatographed on an anion-exchange column (Mono Q HR) as described for oxygenase system PsbAC~T-2~ (Locher *et al.*, 1991a) except that a smaller column was used (10 × 100 mm). The oxygenase component was then purified by hydrophobic interaction chromatography (Locher *et al.*, 1991a).

**Purification of the oxygenase component TerZαβ from strain PSB-4, T-2 or mutant TER-1.** Oxygenase component TerZαβ~PSB-4~, TerZαβ~T-2~ or TerZαβ~TER-1~ was purified from terephthalate-grown cells as described elsewhere (Schläfli Oppenberg *et al.*, 1995).

---

**RESULTS**

**Growth and enzyme activities**

We confirmed that strain PSB-4 utilized sulfobenzoate but not toluenesulfonate as a sole source of carbon and energy for growth (cf. Thurnheer *et al.*, 1986), and observed that terephthalate but not toluenecarboxylate was utilized. In mutant TER-1, terephthalate was utilized as sole source of carbon and energy for growth, but toluenesulfonate, toluenecarboxylate and sulfobenzoate were not. Growth of strains PSB-4 and TER-1 in 10 mM succinate salts medium did not lead to significant synthesis of toluene-sulfonate, sulfobenzoate or terephthalate oxygenating enzymes, whereas a basal level of the protocatechuate 4,5-dioxygenase (PcaP) was observed in strains PSB-4 and T-2 (Table 1). Inducible oxygenation of sulfobenzoate and of protocatechuate or of terephthalate and protocatechuate was detected in strain PSB-4 (Table 1), whereas no detectable oxygenase system TsaMB, dehydrogenase TsaC (Table 1) or dehydrogenase TsaD (not shown) was found. The presence of the genes *tsaMB* (F. Junker & R. Kiewitz, unpublished) encoding TsaMB in T-2, PSB-4 and TER-1 was checked for by PCR (Fig. 2a). A product of the expected size, 386 bp, was observed in strain T-2 only. In addition, total DNA from each of the three strains was digested with *PstI* and analysed by Southern blot hybridizations. The oligonucleotides used for PCR were now used as probes, and each gave a signal at 2 kb (as did the PCR product) for T-2 only (Fig. 2b). We thus concluded that no gene encoding the oxygenation or subsequent oxidation of toluenesulfonate to sulfo-benzoate (regulatory unit R1 in strain T-2; Fig. 1) is present in strain PSB-4 or in mutant TER-1.

The failure of mutant TER-1 to utilize sulfobenzoate might not mean loss of genes encoding a putative oxygenase system, PsbAC~TER-1~, but may reflect solely the lack of reductase component TsaB, which is needed for activity of oxygenase system PsbAC in the parent strain T-2 (see Introduction). However, the largely constitutive synthesis of oxygenase component PsbA~T-2~, which was readily visualized on SDS-PAGE gels (Schläfli Oppenberg *et al.*, 1995; visible in Fig. 4a, lane 1 and Fig. 5a, lane 5), was not matched by a band of putative PsbA~TER-1~ in corresponding experiments with mutant TER-1 (not shown). Similarly, when extracts of mutant TER-1 were supplemented with reductase component TsaB, there was no oxygenation of sulfobenzoate.
F. JUNKER and OTHERS

Table 1. Induction of enzyme activities of crude extract in C. testosteroni T-2, PSB-4 and TER-1 as a function of the growth substrate

| Organism | Growth substrate       | Enzyme specific activity [mkat (kg protein)⁻¹]* |
|----------|------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|
|          |                        | TsaMB    | TsaC   | PsbAC | TerZαβR | PcaP   |
| T-2      | Toluenesulfonate       | 4·0      | 152    | 0·4   | 0·1     | +      |
|          | Toluenecarboxylate     | 1·5      | 94     | ND    | 0·35    | +      |
|          | Sulfobenzoate          | 0·5      | 45·2   | 0·2   | ND      | +†     |
|          | Terephthalate          | ND       | 5·6    | ND    | 0·54    | 6·0    |
|          | Succinate              | ND‡      | 0·8‡   | ND‡   | ND‡     | 0·5†   |
| PSB-4    | Toluenesulfonate       | –        | –      | –     | –       | –      |
|          | Toluenecarboxylate     | –        | –      | –     | –       | –      |
|          | Sulfobenzoate          | ND       | ND     | 0·5   | ND      | 10     |
|          | Terephthalate          | ND       | ND     | ND    | 0·35    | 20·5   |
|          | Succinate              | ND       | ND     | ND    | ND      | 0·6    |
| TER-1    | Toluenesulfonate       | –        | –      | –     | –       | –      |
|          | Toluenecarboxylate     | –        | –      | –     | –       | –      |
|          | Sulfobenzoate          | –        | –      | –     | –       | –      |
|          | Terephthalate          | ND       | ND     | ND    | 0·43    | 5·2    |
|          | Succinate              | ND       | ND     | ND    | ND      | ND     |

* ND, not detected; +, not quantified; –, no growth.
† Data from Locher et al. (1989).
‡ Data from Schläfli Oppenberg et al. (1995).

Fig. 2. Presence and absence of tsaMB encoding the components of methyl monooxygenase system TsaMB in three strains of C. testosteroni. (a) Agarose gel: total DNA of strain T-2, PSB-4 or TER-1 was used in a PCR reaction with primers of the genes tsaMB and total DNA was digested with PstI. The PCR product of 386 bp overlaps both genes. (b) Southern blot hybridization with probe for tsaM: the primer used for PCR was labelled and used as probe. Lanes 2 and 3 gave only a single signal. The same was observed with the PCR primer probe against tsaB. Lanes: 1, DNA size marker; 2, PstI digest of T-2 total DNA; 3, PCR of T-2 total DNA; 4, PstI digest of PSB-4 total DNA; 5, PCR of PSB-4 total DNA; 6, PstI digest of TER-1 total DNA; 7, PCR of TER-1 total DNA; 8, λ-HindIII DNA marker.

PsbAC<sub>PSB-4</sub>

The specific activity of p-sulfobenzoate- and NADH-dependent oxygen uptake in crude extract of strain PSB-4 was directly proportional to the protein concentration (not shown), which was preliminary evidence for a multicomponent enzyme system (cf. Locher et al., 1991a), presumably analogous to oxygenase system PsbAC<sub>T-2</sub>. When proteins in this extract were separated by anion-exchange chromatography, no single fraction catalysed the reaction, but the combination of two sets of fractions

$p$-Sulfobenzoate and terephthalate dioxygenases

Fig. 3. Anion-exchange chromatography of extracts of $p$-sulfobenzoate-grown C. testosteroni PSB-4 and the elution of components of dioxygenase system PsbAC$_{\text{PSB-4}}$. Protein was monitored as $A_{280}$ (——). Gradient elution with $\mathrm{Na}_{2} \mathrm{SO}_{4}$ (---) was used. Reductase PsbC activity ($\diamond$) was determined as NADH-dependent reduction of cytochrome c (fraction C). Oxygenase PsbA activity ($\bullet$) was determined in the presence of fraction 24 as sulfobenzoate- and NADH-dependent oxygen uptake (fraction A).

(a)
| M | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| kDa |  |  |  |  |
| 106 |  |  |  |  |
| 80 |  |  |  |  |
| 49.5 |  |  |  |  |
| 32.5 |  |  |  |  |
| 27.5 |  |  |  |  |

(b)
| M | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| kDa |  |  |  |  |
| 106 |  |  |  |  |
| 80 |  |  |  |  |
| 49.5 |  |  |  |  |
| 32.5 |  |  |  |  |
| 27.5 |  |  |  |  |

(c)
| M | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| kDa |  |  |  |  |
| 106 |  |  |  |  |
| 80 |  |  |  |  |
| 49.5 |  |  |  |  |
| 32.5 |  |  |  |  |
| 27.5 |  |  |  |  |

Fig. 4. Immunological characterization of oxygenase component PsbA and reductase component TsaB. (a) Separation of extracts and protein fractions on SDS-PAGE with visualization by Coomassie staining. (b) The same samples after reaction with antiserum specific for oxygenase PsbA$_{\text{T-2}}$. (c) The same samples after reaction with antiserum specific for reductase TsaB. Lanes: M, prestained marker proteins; 1, crude extract of C. testosteroni T-2, grown on sulfobenzoate (10 μg protein); 2, crude extract of C. testosteroni PSB-4 grown with sulfobenzoate (10 μg protein); 3, partially purified oxygenase PsbA$_{\text{PSB-4}}$ (2 μg protein); 4, partially purified reductase TsaB of sulfobenzoate-grown T-2 (2 μg protein). The oxygenase component gave a single band on Western blots only if the experiment was done immediately after purification; on storage, minor bands of lower $M_{r}$ than the parent were detected. The contrast of lanes M was digitally enhanced.

(C and A, Fig. 3) was active and this activity was increased by the addition of Fe$^{2+}$. The organic product from sulfobenzoate was protocatechuate, which was identified by co-chromatography with authentic material and by its UV spectrum (cf. Locher et al., 1989). We recovered 1 mol protocatechuate (mol sulfobenzoate)$^{-1}$ in a reaction which consumed 1 mol O$_{2}$ and 1 mol NADH. The reaction catalysed is thus:

$p$-sulfobenzoate + NADH + H$^{+}$ + O$_{2}$ →  
protocatechuate + NAD$^{+}$ + HSO$_{3}^{-}$

and we presumed we were working with the PsbAC system from strain PSB-4, which we termed PsbAC$_{\text{PSB-4}}$, to distinguish it from the corresponding enzyme system in strain T-2, PsbAC$_{\text{T-2}}$.

We concluded that fractions C (Fig. 3) represented the reductase component (termed reductase PsbC$_{\text{PSB-4}}$), because these fractions contained a NADH-cytochrome $c$ reductase [and a NADH-2,6-DCPIP reductase] as observed with reductase PsbC$_{\text{T-2}}$ (Locher et al., 1991a). The reductase(s) for cytochrome $c$ displayed a specific activity

F. JUNKER and OTHERS

Table 2. Common properties of PsbAC or TerZαβR systems from different strains of C. testosteroni

| Components       | PsbAC in strains T-2 and PSB-4 | TerZαβR in strains T-2, PSB-4 and TER-1 |
|------------------|--------------------------------|------------------------------------------|
|                  | Reductase                      | TerR                                    |
|                  | PsbC (TsaB*)                   | TerZαβ                                  |
|                  | PsbA                           |                                          |
| Dioxygenase      |                                |                                          |
| $M_r$, denaturing conditions | 50 kDa | 46 kDa ($\alpha$) + 18 kDa ($\beta$) |
| Antigenicity (anti-PsbA$_{\text{T-2}}$) | Positive | None                                   |
| Antigenicity (anti-TerZα$_{\text{T-2}}$) | None    | Positive                               |
| N-terminal amino acid sequence | MLTSENNQILTRVGPGTAM | MQESHIQWHG ($Z\alpha$)                 |
|                  |                                | MINEIQIAAF ($Z\beta$)                  |
| Substrate range  | $p$-Sulfobenzoate              | Terephthalate, naphthalene 1,4-dicarboxylic acid, pyridine 2,5-dicarboxylic acid |
| Elution from Mono Q† | $50 \pm 10$ | $200 \pm 10$ |
| Elution from Phenylsepharose‡ | $50 \pm 10$ | Not used |
| Reductase        |                                |                                          |
| Antigenicity (anti-TsaB$_{\text{T-2}}$) | None    | None                                   |
| Elution from Mono Q† | $40 \pm 10$ | $30 \pm 10$ |

* Reductase PsbC in strain T-2 is not expressed in more recent studies where TsaB is the effective reductase *in vivo* (Schläfli Oppenberg *et al.*, 1995).

† Position in the gradient (mM Na$_2$SO$_4$) where the enzyme eluted.

‡ Position in the gradient [mM (NH$_4$)$_2$SO$_4$] where the enzyme eluted.

that was independent of the protein concentration. Reductase PsbC$_{\text{PSB-4}}$ reduced the oxygenases PsbA$_{\text{PSB-4}}$ (see below) and PsbA$_{\text{T-2}}$, but not oxygenase TsaM. We did not examine the protein further because its activity was lost on hydrophobic interaction chromatography. Reductase PsbC had no immunological cross-reaction with the alternative electron donor to oxygenase PsbA, reductase TsaB (Fig. 4a, c, lanes 1 and 2 with control lane 4).

We concluded that the red-coloured fractions A (Fig. 3) represented the oxygenase (termed oxygenase PsbA$_{\text{PSB-4}}$). Proteins from fractions A were further separated by hydrophobic interaction chromatography, to yield an active protein of at least 90% purity (Fig. 4a, lane 3). The identical $M_r$ values for the oxygenase components PsbA$_{\text{PSB-4}}$ and PsbA$_{\text{T-2}}$ [Fig. 4a, compare lanes 1 and 4 (from strain T-2) with lanes 2 and 3], led us to examine the immunological cross-reactivity of the two proteins (Fig. 4b). The two proteins were indistinguishable on the basis of the nine characteristics we tested (Table 2, interactions with reductase TsaB and with reductase PsbC$_{\text{PSB-4}}$ and UV-visible spectrum; cf. Locher *et al.*, 1991a).

The UV-visible spectrum of oxygenase PsbA$_{\text{T-2}}$ was assumed to represent a Rieske [2Fe-2S] centre (Locher *et al.*, 1991a). We have confirmed this conclusion with oxygenase components TerZαβ and TsaM (Schläfli *et al.*, 1994; F. Junker & R. Kiewitz, unpublished). The EPR spectrum of oxygenase PsbA$_{\text{PSB-4}}$ shows the typical $g$ values ($g_z$, 2·025; $g_y$, 1·921; $g_x$, 1·745) for a Rieske [2Fe-2S] centre (Mason & Cammack, 1992) and we thus confirm that the oxygenase component PsbA contains a Rieske [2Fe-2S] centre.

TerZαβR$_{\text{PSB-4,TER-1}}$

The similarity of oxygenase components PsbA$_{\text{PSB-4}}$ and PsbA$_{\text{T-2}}$ led us to compare oxygenase system TerZαβR$_{\text{T-2}}$ with the terephthalate-oxidizing activity in strain PSB-4 and in mutant TER-1. The reaction catalysed by extracts from each of these organisms was:

terephthalate + NADH + H$^+$ + O$_2$ → terephthalate-diene-diol + NAD$^+$

so we knew that each organism expressed a dioxygenase reaction analogous to that in strain T-2 (Schläfli *et al.*, 1994). This was explored immunologically with strain PSB-4 (Fig. 5). A control experiment with extract from strain T-2 (Fig. 5a, lane 5) under conditions which caused expression of oxygenase TerZαβR$_{\text{T-2}}$ at low levels (Table 1, line 1) shows the major bands from oxygenase PsbA, oxygenase TsaM and reductase TsaB and a minor band for oxygenase TerZα close to an unrelated protein. The corresponding Western blot (Fig. 5b) shows this single relatively weak band of TerZα$_{\text{T-2}}$. A strong protein band of the same $M_r$, especially in cells grown with terephthalate, is seen in extracts from strain PSB-4 (Fig. 5a, lanes 3 and 4) and the cross-reactivity with the specific antibody is seen in Fig. 5b. Oxygenase component TerZα$_{\text{PSB-4}}$ is absent from succinate-grown cells (Fig. 5b, lane 1) but partially induced in sulfobenzoate-grown cells (Fig. 5b, lane 2). Similar experiments with strain TER-1 showed the presence of inducible TerZαβ$_{\text{TER-1}}$; no evidence for the occurrence of oxygenase system TsaMB or of oxygenase PsbA (cf. Fig. 4) was detected.

$p$-Sulfobenzoate and terephthalate dioxygenases

(a)
M 1 2 3 4 5

(b)
M 1 2 3 4 5

Fig. 5. Immunological detection of the dioxygenase component TerZα of TerZαβR<sub>PSB-4</sub>. (a) Separation by SDS-PAGE of extracts (5 μg protein per lane) of C. testosteroni PSB-4 grown with succinate (lane 1), sulfobenzoate (lane 2), terephthalate (lane 3) and terephthalate plus toluenesulfonate (lane 4) or of C. testosteroni T-2 grown with toluenesulfonate (lane 5). Proteins were stained with Coomassie blue and oxygenase components TerZα, PsbA, TsaM and reductase component TsaB from strain T-2 are indicated by arrows. (b) The samples were blotted onto nitrocellulose membranes and probed for reaction with antiserum specific for oxygenase TerZα of TerZαβR from C. testosteroni T-2.

Proteins from each organism were then separated by anion exchange chromatography, which is a one-step purification of the oxygenase component, TerZαβ<sub>T-2</sub> (Schläfli *et al.*, 1994). The characteristics of oxygenase component TerZαβ from strain PSB-4 and mutant TER-1 were identical with those from strain T-2 (Table 2). We were unable to purify reductase component TerR (as with strain T-2), but the preliminary data (Table 2) indicate close similarity, and each reductase was active with each oxygenase TerZαβ.

### DISCUSSION

We knew of the taxonomic similarity of our strains of C. testosteroni, T-2 and PSB-4 (Busse *et al.*, 1992) and of the similarity in their degradative characteristics (Thurnheer *et al.*, 1986). Indeed, the latter similarity has been shown to be identity (e.g., Table 2), where tested. We were previously unable to define the difference in metabolism between the strains, represented by the enzymes of regulatory unit R1 (Fig. 1). These enzymes, mono-oxygenase system TsaMB and two dehydrogenases TsaCD, could not be detected by assays of activity in strain PSB-4, and immunological studies (Fig. 4b, c) showed that neither oxygenase component (TsaMB) was present. We could explain this absence thoroughly, however, only with a genetic method (Fig. 2) which could confirm the absence of the appropriate structural genes, and eliminate the case for solely regulatory effects.

We have found *tsaMBC* to be contiguous (F. Junker & R. Kiewitz, unpublished) so we presume that the genes in regulatory unit R1 (Fig. 1) are part of an operon. We presume that the whole regulatory unit R1 is absent from strain PSB-4, because neither dehydrogenase (TsaCD) is detected (Table 1). We also conclude that mutant TER-1, derived from strain T-2, was generated by a spontaneous deletion of regulatory unit R1 (Fig. 2), and not by a mutation in regulation. It is less easy to establish the fate

of the genes encoding oxygenase system PsbAC (regulatory unit R3) during the generation of mutant TER-1 because we have no satisfactory gene probe. Our data (analogous to Figs 4 and 5) show that no putative PsbA<sub>TER-1</sub> is expressed in our experiments. We postulate deletion of regulatory unit R3 concomitant with the deletion of operon R1, but we cannot exclude the possibility of altered regulation resulting in a cryptic *psbA*. Regulatory units R2 (terephthalate to protocatechuate) and R4 (ring cleavage), in contrast, appear to be unaffected by the mutation (Table 1), as judged by the identity of oxygenase system TerZαβR in parent and mutant (Table 2) and by the similarities in induction patterns and enzyme levels in parent and mutant (Table 1).

Regulatory unit R2 in strains T-2 and PSB-4 encodes identical proteins (oxygenase system TerZαβR, Table 2), within the limits of our data, and shows the same pattern of induction (Table 1). Regulatory unit R3, in contrast, while representing one enzyme activity (oxygenase system PsbAC) in strains T-2 and PSB-4, is subject to different regulation in these organisms. Whereas oxygenase PsbA<sub>T-2</sub> is usually expressed constitutively (Saller *et al.*, 1995; Schläfli Oppenberg *et al.*, 1995) and operon R1 must be expressed at a low level to enable oxygenase PsbA<sub>T-2</sub> to function as an oxygenase system by supplying reductase TsaB (Schläfli Oppenberg *et al.*, 1995), oxygenase PsbA<sub>PSB-4</sub> is strictly inducible (Fig. 5a, lanes 1 and 2) as is reductase PsbC<sub>PSB-4</sub>. Were oxygenase system PsbAC<sub>PSB-4</sub> incomplete, it could not be complemented by reductase TsaB, as *tsaB* is absent from this organism (see above).

Our work on the enzymology of the degradation of toluenesulfonate and toluenecarboxylate in C. testosteroni T-2 has twice failed to yield proteins, reductases PsbC and TerR from oxygenase systems PsbAC and TerZαβR, respectively. We have now found an alternative source for these proteins, C. testosteroni PSB-4, which obviously synthesizes appropriate isofunctional (and possibly ident-

F. JUNKER and OTHERS

ical) proteins (Table 2), but new approaches are clearly needed to purify these proteins for characterization.

Reductase TerR of oxygenase system TerZαβR transfers electrons to oxygenase component TerZαβ, independent of the source of TerR or TerZαβ. Reductase TerR, however, does not transfer electrons to oxygenases PsbA or TsaM, perhaps because TerZαβR belongs to a different subclass of the mononuclear iron oxygenases (cf. Schläfli et al., 1994). Reductase PsbC<sub>PSB-4</sub>, transfers electrons to oxygenase PsbA, independent of the source of PsbA, but there is no transfer from reductase PsbC to oxygenase TsaM or to oxygenase TerZαβ. Solely reductase TsaB can transfer electrons to a heterologous oxygenase (albeit in the same subclass, IA), oxygenase PsbA. Functional hybrid dioxygenases are known in the literature (Furukawa et al., 1993; Harayama et al., 1992). The class IIB reductase components BphA4 and TodA (involved in the dioxygenation of biphenyl (*bph* operon) and toluene (*tod* operon) form active enzymes with the additional components of the other oxygenase (Tod and Bph, respectively) (Furukawa et al., 1993; Hirose et al., 1994). The reductase components (BphA4 and TodA) have 60% sequence identity. The sequenced reductases in subclass IA have about 40% identity (Nakatsu et al., 1995; F. Junker & R. Kiewitz, unpublished), so we wonder whether hybrid enzymes can be formed and whether reductases TsaB and PsbC have a higher similarity than 40%. More experiments are needed to explore these effects, which involve the sites of interaction and electron transfer between proteins.

The utilization of terephthalate is widespread in *C.* testosteroni (Willems et al., 1991) and we have concluded that terephthalate is a natural product (Schläfli et al., 1994), so presumably it is not unusual that the strains T-2 and PSB-4 have a common oxygenase system, TerZαβR. We used to presume that the degradation of sulfobenzoate was more recent, given that only one naturally occurring aromatic sulfonate of low molecular mass was known (Bentley & Holliman, 1970). Now it is clear that a natural sulfonated polymer (humic acid) is widespread (van Loon et al., 1993) and likely, based on its low pK value, to contain sulfonated benzene rings, so it is possible that the degradation of sulfobenzoate is also ancient. The identity of the oxygenase PsbA proteins in strains T-2 and PSB-4 makes it unlikely that they evolved independently. Some testable hypotheses can thus be made. (i) Strain PSB-4 is a deletion mutant of strain T-2 (lacking a functional side-chain oxidation); two-dimensional protein gels might answer this suggestion. (ii) Strain T-2 evolved from strain PSB-4 by the recruitment of side-chain oxidation, the high G+C content (70%) (F. Junker & R. Kiewitz, unpublished) of *tsaMB* (encoding TsaMB) compared with the G+C content (62%) of *C.* testosteroni chromosomal DNA (Busse et al., 1992) would support this hypothesis. (iii) Pre-strain T-2 (toluenecarboxylate<sup>+</sup>, toluenesulfonate<sup>-</sup>) acquired oxygenase system PsbAC from strain PSB-4; this would be difficult to distinguish from (i). (iv) Both strains acquired oxygenase system PsbAC independently from a third strain.

The regulatory units postulated to be involved in the degradation of toluenesulfonate and toluenecarboxylate (Schläfli Oppenberg *et al.*, 1995) are found in three different combinations in the strains or mutant we have studied here. This surely implies high genetic flexibility in these organisms, and many subgroup IA oxygenases are appropriately plasmid-encoded (e.g. Nakatsu *et al.*, 1995). We are now exploring this possibility in strain T-2.

# ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

F.J. was supported by a grant from the Priority Programme Environment of the Swiss National Science Foundation. H.R.S.O. was supported by a grant from the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Zürich.

# REFERENCES

Assinder, S.J. & Williams, P.A. (1990). The TOL plasmids: determinants of the catabolism of toluene and the xylene. *Adv Microb Physiol* 31, 1–69.

Ausubel, F.M., Brent, R., Kingston, R.E., Moore, D.D., Seidman, J.G., Smith, J.A. & Struhl, K. (1987). *Current Protocols in Molecular Biology*. New York: Wiley.

Batie, C.J., Ballou, D.P. & Correll, C.C. (1992). Phthalate dioxygenase reductase and related flavin-iron-sulfur containing electron transferases. In *Chemistry and Biochemistry of Flavoenzymes*, pp. 543–556. Edited by F. Müller. Boca Raton: CRC Press.

Bentley, R.K. & Holliman, F.G. (1970). Pigments of *Pseudomonas* species. Part III. The synthesis of dimethylaeruginosin B and aeruginosin B. *J Chem Soc (C)* 1970, 2447–2457.

Bloom, H., Beyer, H. & Gross, H.S. (1987). Improved silver staining of plant proteins, RNA and DNA in polyacrylamide gels. *Electrophoresis* 8, 93–99.

Bradford, M.M. (1976). A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein-dye binding. *Anal Biochem* 72, 248–254.

Busse, H.-J., El-Banna, T., Oyaizu, H. & Auling, G. (1992). Identification of xenobiotic-degrading isolates from the beta subclass of the Proteobacteria by a polyphasic approach including 16S rRNA partial sequencing. *Int J Syst Bacteriol* 42, 19–26.

Fewson, C.A. (1981). Biodegradation of aromatics with industrial relevance. In *Microbial Degradation of Xenobiotics and Recalcitrant Compounds*, pp. 141–179. Edited by T. Leisinger, A.M. Cook, R. Hütter & J. Nüesch. London: Academic Press.

Furukawa, K., Hirose, J., Suyama, A., Zaiki, T. & Hayashida, S. (1993). Gene components responsible for discrete substrate specificity in the metabolism of biphenyl (*bph* operon) and toluene (*tod* operon). *J Bacteriol* 175, 5224–5232.

Harayama, S., Kok, M. & Neidle, E.L. (1992). Functional and evolutionary relationships among diverse oxygenases. *Annu Rev Microbiol* 46, 565–601.

Hirose, J., Suyama, A., Hayashida, S. & Furukawa, K. (1994). Construction of hybrid biphenyl (*bph*) and toluene (*tod*) genes for functional analysis of aromatic ring dioxygenases. *Gene* 138, 27–33.

Laemmli, U.K. (1970). Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4. *Nature* 227, 680–685.

Locher, H.H., Leisinger, T. & Cook, A.M. (1989). Degradation of *p*-toluenesulphonic acid via sidechain oxidation, desulphonation and meta ring cleavage in *Pseudomonas (Comamonas) testosteroni* T-2. *J Gen Microbiol* 135, 1969–1978.

Locher, H. H., Leisinger, T. & Cook, A. M. (1991a). 4-Sulphobenzoate 3,4-dioxygenase: purification and properties of a desulphonative two-component enzyme system from *Comamonas testosteroni* T-2. *Biochem J* 274, 833–842.

Locher, H. H., Leisinger, T. & Cook, A. M. (1991b). 4-Toluene sulfonate methyl-monooxygenase from *Comamonas testosteroni* T-2: purification and some properties of the oxygenase component. *J Bacteriol* 173, 3741–3748.

Locher, H. H., Malli, C., Hooper, S., Vorherr, T., Leisinger, T. & Cook, A. M. (1991c). Degradation of *p*-toluic acid (*p*-toluene carboxylic acid) and *p*-toluene sulphonic acid via oxygenation of the methyl sidechain is initiated by the same set of enzymes in *Comamonas testosteroni* T-2. *J Gen Microbiol* 137, 2201–2208.

van Loon, W. M. G. M., Boon, J. J. & de Groot, B. (1993). Quantitative analysis of sulfonic acid groups in macromolecular lignosulfonic acids and aquatic humic substances by temperature-resolved pyrolysis-mass spectrometry. *Environ Sci Technol* 27, 2387–2396.

Mason, J. R. & Cammack, R. (1992). The electron-transport proteins of hydroxylating bacterial dioxygenases. *Annu Rev Microbiol* 46, 277–305.

Nakatsu, C. H., Straus, N. A. & Wyndham, R. C. (1995). The nucleotide sequence of the Tn5271 3-chlorobenzoate 3,4-dioxygenase genes (*cbaAB*) unites the class IA oxygenases in a single lineage. *Microbiology* 141, 485–495.

Riester, J., Zumft, W. G. & Kroneck, P. M. H. (1989). Nitrous oxide reductase from *Pseudomonas stutzeri*: redox properties and spectroscopic characterization of different forms of the multicopper enzyme. *Eur J Biochem* 178, 751–762.

Saller, E., Laue, H., Schläfli Oppenberg, H. R. & Cook, A. M. (1995). Purification and some properties of (1R,2S)-1,2-dihydroxy-3,5-cyclohexadiene-1,4-dicarboxylate dehydrogenase from *Comamonas testosteroni* T-2. *FEMS Microbiol Lett* 130, 97–102.

Schläfli, H. R., Weiss, M. A., Leisinger, T. & Cook, A. M. (1994). Terephthalate 1,2-dioxygenase system from *Comamonas testosteroni* T-2: purification and some properties of the oxygenase component. *J Bacteriol* 176, 6644–6652.

Schläfli, H. R., Baker, D. P., Leisinger, T. & Cook, A. M. (1995). Stereospecificity of hydride removal from NADH by reductases of multicomponent nonheme iron oxygenase systems. *J Bacteriol* 177, 831–834.

Schläfli Oppenberg, H. R., Chen, G., Leisinger, T. & Cook, A. M. (1995). Regulation of the degradative pathways from 4-toluene-sulfonate and 4-toluencarboxylate to protocatechuate in *Comamonas testosteroni* T-2. *Microbiology* 141, 1891–1899.

Stanier, R. Y. & Ornston, L. N. (1973). The β-ketoadipate pathway. *Adv Microb Physiol* 9, 89–151.

Thurnheer, T., Köhler, T., Cook, A. M. & Leisinger, T. (1986). Orthanilic acid and analogues as carbon sources for bacteria growth physiology and enzymic desulphonation. *J Gen Microbiol* 132, 1215–1220.

Willems, A., Pot, B., Falsen, E., Vandamme, P., Gillis, M., Kersters, K. & de Ley, J. (1991). Polyphasic taxonomic study of the emended genus *Comamonas*: relationship to *Aquaspirillum aquaticum*, E. Falsen group 10, and other clinical isolates. *Int J Syst Bacteriol* 41, 427–444.

Received 29 March 1996; accepted 22 May 1996.
