
Pathology (1998) 30, pp. 196–202

# THE MOLECULAR GENETICS OF CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM TUMORS

**Ho-Keung Ng and Paula Y.P. Lam**

*Department of Anatomical & Cellular Pathology, Prince of Wales Hospital, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong*

## Summary

Over the past few years, although much has been learned about the molecular genetics of central nervous system (CNS) tumors, researchers and pathologists are only beginning to understand the scientific basis of the development of these tumors. Data accumulated so far support the division of glioblastoma into two clinical and molecular subsets. Primary or *de novo* glioblastomas occur in older patients, are clinically aggressive and exhibit epidermal growth factor receptor amplification or overexpression. Secondary glioblastomas develop from pre-existing low-grade astrocytomas, have a more protracted clinical course, and frequently contain *p53* mutations. Both types of tumors show deletions of chromosome 10 and possibly mutations of the PTEN/MMAC1 gene as an endstage event. Oligodendrogliomas have been shown to have genetic abnormalities distinct from those of the astrocytic tumors, commonly involving chromosomes 1p and 19q. As regards meningiomas, loss of chromosome 22q and mutations of the neurofibromatosis type 2 gene are frequent events and loss of chromosome 14q and 10q may be seen in atypical or malignant transformation. Such genetic findings, apart from providing a better understanding of neoplastic transformation in brain tumors, are beginning to form the basis of a new approach to neuro-oncology.

Key words: Astrocytic tumor, glioblastoma, meningioma, molecular tumorigenesis.

Abbreviations: EGFR: Epidermal growth factor receptor; LOH, loss of heterozygosity; PDGF: Platelet-derived growth factor.

Accepted 18 December 1997

## INTRODUCTION

The advent of molecular biologic techniques in studying brain tumors has provided scientists and pathologists with new information about the pathogenesis of central nervous system tumors. As in most human cancers, genetic abnormalities found so far involve amplification of oncogenes, mutations of tumor suppressor genes or deletions of chromosomal segments harboring potential tumor suppressor sites. The recent revision of the WHO classification grades the astrocytic tumors into pilocytic astrocytoma (grade I), fibrillary astrocytoma (grade II), anaplastic astrocytoma (grade III) and glioblastoma multiforme (grade IV). Pilocytic astrocytomas, with a much more benign behavior, are biologically distinct from the spectrum of diffuse astrocytomas. For the latter group, the majority of low-grade tumors will progress to malignant forms with the passage

of time. In this review, we will focus on the diffuse astrocytomas, with brief discussions on the other gliomas and meningiomas. Emphasis will be on the molecular mechanisms of tumorigenesis.

### TOWARDS A MOLECULAR CLASSIFICATION OF ASTROCYTIC TUMORS

Glioblastoma multiforme, the commonest primary brain tumor, may develop *de novo* (primary glioblastoma) or through progression from low-grade or anaplastic astrocytoma (secondary glioblastoma). The patient with a primary glioblastoma is usually older, the clinical history is short, tumor growth is rapid and the prognosis dismal. For secondary glioblastomas, there should be clinical, radiologic or histologic evidence of an evolution from a less malignant precursor lesion, i.e., low-grade or anaplastic astrocytoma, over an interval of at least six months. Patients with secondary glioblastomas are usually younger, the tumors progress more slowly and the chance of survival following treatment is better. Although these two groups are generally indistinguishable histologically, a vast amount of evidence has accumulated that they follow different pathways of molecular tumorigenesis, culminating in a common terminal phenotype (Fig. 1). von Deimling, Louis and co-workers use the terms type I and type II glioblastomas, which are roughly equivalent to secondary and primary glioblastomas, respectively, as used by Kleihues and co-workers. Primary and secondary glioblastomas describe tumors by their clinical characteristics, and these two groups also exhibit different genetic properties, whereas type I and type II glioblastomas emphasize the different molecular properties rather than clinical features. Type I tumors are characterized by loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of chromosome 17p closely associated with *p53* mutations and absence of epidermal growth factor (*EGFR*) gene amplification. Type II tumors are characterized by *EGFR* amplification and lack of 17p LOH/*p53* mutation. In this article, the terms primary and secondary glioblastomas will be used. It has also become clear recently that another subgroup of glioblastoma multiforme, the giant cell glioblastoma, can be delineated from the other glioblastomas. Although giant cell glioblastomas develop clinically *de novo*, they contain genetic alterations similar to those observed in secondary glioblastomas. This may account for their generally favorable prognosis.

### EPIDERMAL GROWTH FACTOR RECEPTOR

The *EGFR*, a transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinase, is overexpressed in about 40% of glioblastomas and the

Precursor
LOH 17q (NF1)

PDGF
overexpression

CDK4
gene amplification

Pilocytic
astrocytomas

Precursor
LOH 17p (p53)
LOH 22q

Astrocytoma

LOH 13q (Rb)
LOH 9p (p15, p16)
LOH 19q

Astrocytoma III

LOH 10

Secondary
GBM

Precursor
MDM2
gene
amplification

EGFR
gene
amplification

LOH 10

Primary
GBM

Fig. 1 Potential molecular pathways of astrocytomas (modified from$^{1}$ Kleihues and Ohgaki$^{3}$)

EGFR gene may be amplified or rearranged, producing truncated, constitutively active mutants.$^{7-10}$ In our experience, transfection of an antisense EGFR construct results in loss of anchorage-independent growth and a reduced rate of proliferation in malignant glioma cell lines.$^{11}$ Aberrations of EGFR are usually associated with a loss of chromosome 10.$^{10}$ It has been suggested that EGFR abnormalities are prevalent in primary glioblastomas and to an extent are mutually exclusive with p53 mutations in astrocytic tumors.$^{12}$ The latter is much more commonly found in secondary than primary glioblastomas.$^{4,5}$ EGFR amplification and overexpression, with resultant growth stimulatory, antiapoptotic and angiogenic effects, are believed to be the primary reasons for the poorer outcome of primary glioblastomas over secondary glioblastomas.$^{5}$

provides a mechanism to escape from the p53 regulated control of cell growth.$^{16}$ Amplification of MDM2 is present in fewer than 10% of glioblastomas and is apparently more commonly found in primary glioblastomas.$^{17,18}$ The relationship between MDM2 and p53 protein accumulation will be discussed in later sections.

Other oncogenes that have been reported to be involved in astrocytic tumors are tabulated in Table 1.

$p53$ GENE IN ASTROCYTIC TUMORS

The $p53$ gene on chromosome 17p has a major role in apoptosis, cell cycle arrest, and response to DNA damage. Loss of heterozygosity of chromosome 17p occurs in about 35% of astrocytic tumors regardless of histological grades$^{19,20}$ and $p53$ mutations also occur in approximately one-third of all grades of astrocytic tumors.$^{21}$ This suggests that $p53$ mutation occurs early on in the pathogenesis of astrocytic tumors, although in other authors' experience, $p53$ mutations may be infrequent in low-grade astrocytomas and they have also been found in malignant transformation of fibrillary astrocytomas to high-grade lesions.$^{22-25}$ There are no brain specific mutations but high frequencies of mutations are found in the evolutionarily conserved domains of exons 5–8, in particular codons 175, 245, 248, 273 and 282.$^{4}$ Mutations are primarily missense mutations.$^{21}$ These codons are located within the DNA-binding domain and mutations at these sites would lead to loss of $p53$-mediated transcriptional activity.$^{26}$

$p53$ mutations or LOH of 17p are almost never found in GBMs with $EGFR$ amplification, leading researchers to propose the two types of GBMs alluded to earlier: the type I or secondary glioblastomas have frequent $p53$ mutations but no $EGFR$ gene amplification, whereas the type II or primary glioblastomas frequently have amplified or overexpressed $EGFR$ but no $p53$ mutations.$^{3,4,12,27}$ In tumors in which multiple tumor biopsies are examined by molecular methods, progression of low-grade astrocytomas to anaplastic astrocytoma or glioblastoma seems to occur at a similar frequency in lesions with and without $p53$ mutations but the time interval until progression in anaplastic

OTHER ONCOGENES INVOLVED IN ASTROCYTIC TUMORS

Other oncogenes reported to be involved in the development of astrocytic tumors are listed in Table 1. Platelet derived growth factor (PDGF) is a dimer of combinations of A and B chains. The ligands are recognized by two types of cell surface receptors, PDGFR-$\alpha$ and PDGF-$\beta$, which belong to the tyrosine kinase family of receptors. Studies have shown that PDGF-A chain and PDGF-$\alpha$ receptors are overexpressed in astrocytomas though gene amplifications are uncommon.$^{13,14}$ On the other hand, PDGF-B chain and PDGF-$\beta$ receptor are overexpressed in endothelial cells which often proliferate exuberantly in glioblastomas.$^{15}$ Overexpression of PDGFR-$\alpha$ is strongly associated with loss of heterozygosity of chromosome 17p and $p53$ mutations, suggesting that PDGF abnormality is typical of the pathway leading to the formation of secondary glioblastoma.$^{14}$

The $MDM2$ oncogene contains a $p53$ DNA-binding site and the transcription of $MDM2$ is induced by wild-type $p53$. The $MDM2$ protein, in turn, forms a complex with $p53$ abolishing the latter's transcription activity. Thus, an autoregulatory feedback loop regulates the activity of $p53$ and $MDM2$ and amplification or overexpression of $MDM2$

TABLE 1 Oncogenes involved in the development of astrocytomas

| Oncogenes                     | Chromosome location | Aberrations found                  | References |
|-------------------------------|--------------------|------------------------------------|------------|
| **Growth factors**            |                    |                                    |            |
| sis (PDGF)                    | 22q12.3–13.1      | Amplification, rearrangement, or overexpression | See text   |
| **Cell surface receptors with protein-tyrosin kinase activity** |          |                                    |            |
| erB                           | 7p12–13           | Amplification, rearrangement, overexpression | See text   |
| ros1                          | 6q21–22           | Rearrangement                      | 88         |
| **Intracellular transducers** |                    |                                    |            |
| met                           | 7q31              | Amplification                      | 89         |
| H-ras                         | 11p15.5           | Overexpression                     | 90         |
| N-ras                         | 1p13              | Amplification, rearrangement       | 91         |
| **Nuclear proteins**          |                    |                                    |            |
| fos                           | 14q24.3           | Overexpression                     | 92         |
| N-myc                         | 2p24.1            | Amplification                      | 93         |
| gli                           | 12q13–14.3        | Amplification                      | 94, 95     |
| MDM2                          | 12q13–14          | Amplification                      | See text   |

astrocytoma or glioblastoma tends to be shorter for low-grade astrocytomas carrying a $p53$ mutation.²⁸ Again in these tumors identical mutations of $p53$ are found with multiple biopsy samples.²⁵,²⁸

Immunohistochemical studies of $p53$ protein often show a higher percentage of positive staining than mutations.²¹,²⁹ The mechanism of this discrepancy between immunoreactivity and mutation is not always apparent. The $MDM2$ oncogene, the product of which binds to and inactivates $p53$ protein, has been examined and does not appear to be amplified in astrocytomas with $p53$ protein accumulation.²⁹⁻³¹ Similarly, none of the gliomas with $MDM2$ amplifications shows $p53$ mutations.¹⁸ Investigations of the downstream regulator $CIP1$ gene have not revealed alterations in those tumors.³² The $p53$ protein that has been accumulated in some tumors has been shown to be wild-type and may reflect a physiological response by $p53$ to the increased DNA damage or deregulated proliferation that is associated with high-grade tumors.²¹,³⁰ On the other hand, the finding of $p53$ mutations in some astrocytic tumors with 17p LOH suggests the presence of another as yet unidentified tumor suppressor gene residing on 17p.²¹,³³⁻³⁵ A recent report has shown LOH at another locus at 17p13.3 that is independent of the $p53$ locus but so far no gene has yet been identified.³⁶

### CHROMOSOME 10 AND PTEN/MMAC1 TUMOR SUPPRESSOR GENE

More than 70% of glioblastomas show LOH on chromosome 10 and many cases show loss of the entire chromosome 10. As this genetic abnormality is not found in low-grade astrocytomas and only rarely in anaplastic astrocytomas, it is considered that this is a late event during astrocytoma progression. Amplification of $EGFR$ in glioblastoma is always associated with loss of chromosome 10, in particular 10q, suggesting that inactivation of a chromosome 10 gene may precede $EGFR$ gene amplification.¹⁰,³⁸ The mechanism of this relationship is unclear but it has been suggested that loss of chromosome 10 genes may foster a degree of genomic instability that allows $EGFR$ amplification.⁴ The recently identified tumor suppressor gene $PTEN/MMAC1$ on chromosome 10q23.3 was found to be mutated in 30% of glioblastoma cell lines and xenografts.³⁹,⁴⁰ At the time of writing, analyses of $PTEN/MMAC1$ mutations in gliomas have not yet been published. It has also been believed for some time that tumor suppressor genes for glioblastomas other than $PTEN/MMAC1$ exist in chromosome 10q, possibly in the region of 10q25 as well as another site at 10p.⁴,⁵,¹⁰,⁴¹⁻⁴³ Recently, a new tumor suppressor gene, $DMBT1$, has been identified on chromosome 10q25.3–26.1 and intragenic deletions are found in 23% of glioblastomas.⁴⁴ As can be seen from Fig. 1, LOH10 occurs in both primary and secondary glioblastomas and may be a common endstage event for both groups of tumors.

#### p16, CDK4 AND Rb ABNORMALITIES

Transition from fibrillary astrocytoma to anaplastic astrocytoma is believed to be associated with inactivation of tumor suppressor genes on chromosomes 9p and 13q. The $p16$ gene located on 9p21 has been shown to inhibit specifically the binding of CDK4 to cyclin D, thus preventing phosphorylation of the Rb protein and subsequent progression of the cell cycle. Inactivation of the $p16$ gene by deletion has been reported in about 40% of glioblastomas and 20% of anaplastic astrocytomas.⁴⁵,⁴⁶ However, such deletions have not been observed in low-grade astrocytomas, indicating that loss of functions in these genes may be responsible for the malignant progression of astrocytomas.⁴⁵,⁴⁷⁻⁴⁹ Deletions of the $p16$ gene are much more commonly seen in primary than secondary glioblastoma.³ Astrocytic tumors with homozygous $p16$ deletions also have higher Ki-67 proliferation indices than those without $p16$ deletions.⁵⁰ The prevalence of $p16$ deletion, together with the frequent $EGFR$ amplification and overexpression, is regarded as the main reason for a primary glioblastoma’s unfavorable prognosis. Other than homozygous deletions, point mutations and methylation of the 5 CpG islands are rare alternative mechanisms of inactivation of the $p16$ gene.⁵¹⁻⁵³

Fig. 2 shows a simplified scheme of the molecular control of the cell cycle. Other than deletion of the $p16$ gene, the next most common alteration of the $p16$-CDK4-cyclin D1/pRb cell cycle pathway is pRb inactivation,

Fig. 2 Schematic representation of some cell-cycle regulatory genes that have been implicated in the formation of astrocytomas. Arrows represent activation; blunt-ended bars represent inhibition. See text for details of involvement of these genes in CNS tumors.

occurring in about 20–30% of high-grade astrocytomas.⁴⁶,⁵³⁻⁵⁵ Amplification and overexpression of the CDK4 gene on chromosome 12 have been observed in 10–15% of anaplastic astrocytomas and glioblastomas.⁴⁵,⁵⁴,⁵⁶,⁵⁷ In general, an inverse relationship exists between genetic events of p16 and pRb in gliomas and p16 deletion, pRb inactivation and CDK4 amplification rarely occur together in the same tumors.⁴⁵,⁵³,⁵⁴ This suggests that alterations of any individual component of the pathway have a similar effect on cell cycle deregulation.⁴ Disruption of the cell cycle can occur through loss of suppressor activity of the p53 protein, amplification of the MDM2 gene, or point mutation of the p21 WAF-1/CIP1 gene, which has been discussed in the previous section.

MOLECULAR ALTERATIONS IN OTHER BRAIN TUMORS

Only a brief discussion of the molecular alterations in brain tumors other than the diffuse astrocytomas will be carried out here, and they have been less intensely studied. The pilocytic astrocytomas are typified by allelic loss on chromosomes 17q, a phenomenon not observed in the diffuse astrocytomas and pilocytic astrocytomas are commonly found in the neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) syndrome.⁶⁶ However, in contrast to other tumor suppressor genes, mutations of NF1 are not found in pilocytic astrocytomas; instead, there is an upregulation of the NF1 transcript.⁶⁷ Similarly, p53 mutations are distinctly uncommon in pilocytic astrocytomas.²⁹,⁶⁸

Oligodendrogli tumors are generally believed to develop from molecular pathways distinct from those of astrocytomas. One of the most frequent genetic alteration in oligodendrogliomas is LOH of 19q, which occurs in about 50–80% of oligodendrogli tumors.⁵⁹,⁶⁹⁻⁷¹ Another important genetic alteration is LOH of the short arm of chromosome 1, which is found in 40–90% of oligodendrogli tumors in different series.⁷⁰⁻⁷² All oligodendrogliomas with 1p LOH also had LOH on 19q, suggesting LOH of 1p to be an essential step in the evolution of these tumors.⁷⁰ Unlike the astrocytic tumors, aberrations of the p53 and MDM2 genes are uncommon events in oligodendrogli tumors.²⁵,⁷³,⁷⁴ Curiously, in contrast to astrocytic tumors in which EGFR overexpression is commonly found in the high-grade tumors, 50% of oligodendrogli tumors, generally a low-grade lesion, overexpress EGFR.⁷⁵

Allelic loss of chromosome 22q, which contains the neurofibromatosis type 2 tumor suppressor gene (NF2) is seen in 20–30% of astrocytomas.³⁸ However, studies so far have failed to detect any mutation in the entire coding sequence of the NF2 gene, raising the possibility that another gene nearby may be involved in the tumorigenesis of astrocytomas.⁶⁴ Loss of heterozygosity of sites on chromosome 11 has been found in about 30% of high-grade astrocytic tumors, suggesting a putative tumor suppressor gene at 11p15.5 but so far no candidate gene has been cloned.⁶⁵

As regards ependymomas, most of the genetic changes described for astrocytic and oligodendrogli tumors are not present and in general, specific chromosomal aberrations and cancer genes for ependymomas remain to be identified. Ependymoma is a known complication of the neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) syndrome. Allelic loss of 22q, where the NF2 gene resides at 22q12, occurs in about 30% of ependymomas but some investigators have found mutations of the NF2 gene in ependymomas while others have not.⁷⁶⁻⁷⁸ Mutations of p53 gene are uncommon in ependymomas.⁷³,⁷⁴,⁷⁹

In meningiomas, cytogenetic studies have established that up to 70% of meningiomas show complete or partial loss of chromosome 22 and deletions of chromosomes 1 and 14 are also common. Similarly to ependymomas, meningiomas are also frequently found in type 2 neurofibromatosis. Allelic loss of 22q occurs in about 60% of meningiomas and mutations of the NF2 gene in about 40% of cases. Both LOH and NF2 mutations occur in the same tumor in many cases, clearly fulfilling Knudson's hypothesis for tumor suppressor genes. Multiple specific segments of chromosome 14q are also potential tumor suppressor sites for meningiomas, which may be related to atypical and anaplastic changes in meningiomas. Similarly, loss of chromosome 10 loci have been described to be associated with malignant changes. Fine deletion mapping and specific cloning of genes in these chromosomes have yet to be performed.

## THE FUTURE

Over the decades, brain tumors, in particular glioblastomas, have retained their dismal prognosis despite advances in neurosurgical techniques and chemotherapy. While the classification of CNS tumors continues to rely on morphological features, it has become increasingly clear that there are subsets within the glioblastomas, characterized by their molecular genetic aberrations as well as differential clinical behaviors. At present, only a fraction of the genetic abnormalities of astrocytic tumors has been unraveled. It is conceivable that in the future, clinicopathologic as well as therapeutic studies of gliomas may require molecular characterization of tumors, eg; p53 mutation. Apart from providing an understanding of tumorigenesis, molecular studies in the future may yield information useful for management and prognosis for astrocytic tumors. While there is no specific immunohistochemical marker for oligodendrogliomas, information is emerging that these tumors follow genetic pathways distinct from those of astrocytomas. Such information may aid in the precise identification of oligodendroglial tumors, which is essential as there is mounting evidence that oligodendroglial tumors respond to chemotherapy and can be treated differently from other gliomas. As regards meningiomas, although the key factors for recurrence remain the completeness of surgical excision and tumor grading, genetic aberrations in chromosomes 14q and 10q may provide an adjunct to clinical prediction in the future.

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This study was supported by a grant from the Hong Kong Research Grant Council.

Address for correspondence: H-K.N., Department of Anatomical & Cellular Pathology, Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong.

## REFERENCES

1. Kleihues P, Burger PC, Scheithauer BW. *Histological Typing of Tumours of the Central Nervous System*. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1993.
2. Afra D, Muller W. Recurrent low-grade gliomas. Dedifferentiation and prospects of re-operation. In: Karim ABMF, Laws ER Jr, editors. Glioma. Principles and Practice in Neuro-oncology. Berlin: Springer Verlag, 1991, pp. 189–203.
3. Kleihues P, Ohgaki H. Genetics of glioma progression and the definition of primary and secondary glioblastoma. *Brain Pathol* 1997; 7: 1131–6.
4. Louis DN. A molecular genetic model of astrocytoma. *Histopathology* 1997; 7: 755–64.
5. von Deimling A. Molecular genetic classification of astrocytic and oligodendroglial tumors. *Brain Pathol* 1997; 7: 1311–3.
6. Ohgaki H, Watanabe K, Peraud A, Nakazato Y, von Deimling A. Giant cell glioblastoma. In: Kleihues P, Cavenee WK, editors. *Pathology and Genetics. Tumours of the Nervous System*. Lyon: World Health Organization, International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), 1997; pp. 25–6.
7. Wong AJ, Bigner SH, Bigner DD, Kinzler KW, Hamilton SR, Vogelstein B. Increased expression of the epidermal growth factor receptor gene in malignant gliomas is invariably associated with gene amplification. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 1987; 84: 6899–903.
8. Wong AJ, Ruppert JM, Bigner SH, Grzeschik CH, Humphrey PA, Bitgner DS, et al. Structural alterations of the epidermal growth factor receptor gene in human gliomas. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 1992; 89: 2965–9.
9. Ekstrand AJ, Sugawa N, James CD, Collins VP. Amplified and rearranged epidermal growth factor receptor genes in human glioblastomas reveal deletions of sequences encoding portions of the N- and/or C-terminal tails. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 1992; 89: 4309–13.
10. von Deimling A, Louis DN, von Ammon K, Petersen I, Hoell T, Chung RY, et al. Association of epidermal growth factor receptor gene amplification with loss of chromosome 10 in human glioblastoma multiforme. *J Neurosurg* 1992; 77: 295–301.
11. Tian XX, Lam PYP, Chen J, To TSS, Ng HK. Antisense epidermal growth factor receptor transfection impairs the proliferation ability of glioblastoma U87 cells. *Brain Pathol* 1997; 7: 1192.
12. Watanabe K, Tachibana O, Sato K, Yonekawa Y, Kleihues P, Ohgaki H. Overexpression of the EGF receptor and p53 mutations are mutually exclusive in the evolution of primary and secondary glioblastoma. *Brain Pathol* 1996; 6: 217–24.
13. Hermanson M, Funa K, Hartman M, Claesson-Welsh L, Heldin CH, Westermark B, et al. Platelet-derived growth factor and its receptors in human glioma tissue: expression of messenger RNA and protein suggests the presence of autocrine and paracrine loops. *Cancer Res* 1992; 52: 3213–9.
14. Hermanson M, Funa K, Westermark B, Heldin CH, Wiestler OD, Louis DN, et al. Association of loss of heterozygosity on chromosome 17p with high platelet-derived growth factor expression in human malignant gliomas. *Cancer Res* 1996; 56: 164–71.
15. Pate KH, Breir G, Farrell CL, Risau W. Platelet-derived growth factor receptor-β is induced during tumor development and upregulated during tumor progression in endothelial cells in human gliomas. *Lab Invest* 1992; 67: 529–34.
16. Picksley SM, Lane DP. The p53-MDM2 autoregulatory feedback loop: a paradigm for the regulation of growth control by p53? *Bioessays* 1993; 15: 689–90.
17. Biernat W, Kleihues P, Yonekawa Y, Ohgaki H. Amplification and overexpression of MDM2 in primary (de novo) glioblastomas. *J Neuropathol Exp Neurol* 1996; 56: 180–5.
18. Reifenberger G, Liu L, Ischimura K, Schmidt EE, Collins VP. Amplification and overexpression of the MDM2 gene in a subset of human malignant gliomas without p53 mutations. *Cancer Res* 1993; 53: 2736–9.
19. El-Azouzi M, Chung RY, Farmer GE, Martuza RL, Black PM, Rouleau GA, et al. Loss of distinct regions on the short arm of chromosome 17 associated with tumorigenesis of human astrocytomas. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 1989; 86: 7186–90.
20. James CD, He J, Carlbom E, Mikkelsen T, Ridderheim PA, Cavanee WK, et al. Loss of genetic information in central nervous system tumors common to children and young adults. *Genes Chrom Cancer* 1990; 2: 94–102.
21. Louis DN. The p53 gene and protein in human brain tumors. *J Neuropathol Exp Neurol* 1994; 53: 11–21.
22. Sidransky D, Mikkelsen T, Schwechheimer K, Rosenblum ML, Cavenee W, Vogelstein B. Clonal expansion of p53 mutant cells is associated with brain tumor progression. *Nature* 1992; 355: 846–7.
23. Ng HK, Lo KW, Huang DP, Poon WS. p53 in low-grade gliomas. *Int J Surg Pathol* 1994; 1: 163–70.
24. Ng HK, Lo SY, Huang DP, Poon WS. Paraffin section p53 protein immunohistochemistry in neuroectodermal tumors. *Pathology* 1994; 26: 1–5.
25. Reifenberger J, Ring GU, Gies U, Cobbers L, Oberstrass J, An HX, et al. Analysis of p53 mutation and epidermal growth factor receptor amplification in recurrent gliomas in malignant progression. *J Neuropathol Exp Neurol* 1996; 55: 822–31.
26. Cho Y, Gorina S, Jeffrey PD, Pavletich NP. Crystal structure of a p53 tumor suppressor-DNA complex: understanding tumorigenic mutations. *Science* 1994; 265: 346–55.

27. von Deimling A, von Ammon K, Schoenfeld D, Wiestler OD, Seizinger BR, Louis DN. Subsets of glioblastoma multiforme defined by molecular genetic analysis. *Brain Pathol* 1993; 3: 19–26.

28. Watanabe K, Sato K, Biernat W, Tachibana O, von Ammon K, Ogata N, *et al.* Incidence and timing of p53 mutations during astrocytoma progression in patients with multiple biopsies. *Clin Cancer Res* 1997; 3: 523–30.

29. Lang FF, Miller DC, Pisharody S, Koslow M, Newcomb EW. High frequency of p53 protein accumulation without p53 gene mutation in human juvenile pilocytic, low grade and anaplastic astrocytomas. *Oncogene* 1994; 9: 949–54.

30. Rubio MP, von Deimling A, Yandell DW, Wiestler OD, Gusella JF, Louis DN. Accumulation of wild-type p53 protein in human astrocytomas. *Cancer Res* 1993; 53: 3465–7.

31. Newcomb EW, Madonia WJ, Pisharody S, Lang FF, Koslow M, Miller DC. A correlative study of p53 protein alteration and p53 gene mutation in glioblastoma multiforme. *Brain Pathol* 1993; 3: 229–35.

32. Koopman J, Maintz D, Schild S, Schramm J, Louis DN, Wiestler OD, *et al.* Multiple polymorphisms, but no mutations, in the WAFI/CIP1/CDKN1 gene in human brain tumors. *Br J Cancer* 1995; 72: 1230–3.

33. Saxena A, Clark WC, Robertson JT, Ikejiri B, Olddfield EH, Ali IU. Evidence for the involvement of a potential second tumor suppressor gene on chromosome 17 distinct from p53 in malignant astrocytomas. *Cancer Res* 1992; 52: 6716–21.

34. Frankel RH, Bayona W, Koslow M, Newcomb EW. p53 mutations in human malignant gliomas: comparison of loss of heterozygosity with mutation frequency. *Cancer Res* 1992; 52: 1427–33.

35. von Deimling A, Eibl RH, Ohgaki H, Louis DN, von Ammon K, Petersen I, *et al.* p53 mutations are associated with 17p allelic loss in grade II and grade III astrocytoma. *Cancer Res* 1992; 52: 2987–90.

36. Chattopadhyay P, Rathore A, Mathur M, Sarkar C, Mahapatra AK, Sinha S. Loss of heterozygosity of a locus on 17p13.3, independent of p53, is associated with higher grades of astrocytic tumours. *Oncogene* 1997; 15: 871–4.

37. Ohgaki H, Schauble B, zur Hausen A, von Ammon K, Kleihues P. Genetic alterations associated with the evolution and progression of astrocytic brain tumours. *Virchows Arch* 1995; 427: 113–8.

38. Fults D, Pedone CA, Thomas GA, White R. Allelotype of human malignant astrocytoma. *Cancer Res* 1990; 50: 5784–9.

39. Li J, Yen C, Liaw D, Podsypanina K, Bose S, Wang SI, *et al.* PTEN, a putative protein tyrosine phosphatase gene mutated in human brain, breast and prostate cancer. *Science* 1997; 275: 1943–7.

40. Steck PA, Pershouse MA, Jasser SA, Yung WKA, Lin H, Ligon AH, *et al.* Identification of a candidate tumour suppressor gene, MMAC1, at chromosome 10q23.3 that is mutated in multiple advanced cancers. *Nature Genet* 1997; 15: 356–62.

41. Karl bom AE, James CD, Boethius J, Cavenee WK, Collins VP, Nordenskjold M, *et al.* Loss of heterozygosity in malignant gliomas involves at least three distinct regions on chromosome 10. *Human Genetics* 1993; 92: 169–74.

42. Rasheed BKA, Fuller GN, Friedman AH, Bigner DD, Bigner SH. Loss of heterozygosity for 10q loci in human gliomas. *Genes Chrom Cancer* 1992; 5: 75–82.

43. Rasheed BKA, McLendon RE, Friedman HS, Friedman AH, Fuchs HE, Bigner DD, *et al.* Chromosome 10 deletion mapping in human gliomas: a common deletion region in 10q25. *Oncogene* 1995; 10: 2243–6.

44. Mollenhauer J, Wiemann S, Scheurlen W, Korn B, Hayashi Y, Wilgenbus KK, *et al.* DMBl, a new member of the SRCC superfamily, on chromosome 10q25.3–26.1 is deleted in malignant brain tumours. *Nature Genetics* 1997; 17: 32–40.

45. Schmidt EE, Ichimura K, Reifenberger G, Collins VP. CDKN2 (p16/MTSl) gene deletion or CDK4 amplification occurs in the majority of glioblastomas. *Cancer Res* 1994; 54: 6321–4.

46. Ichimura K, Schmidt EE, Goike HM, Collins VP. Human glioblastoma with no alteration of the CDK2A (p16INK4A, MTS1) and CDK4 genes have frequent mutations of the retinoblastoma gene. *Oncogene* 1996; 13: 1065–72.

47. Jen J, Harper JW, Bigner SH, Bigner DD, Papadopoulos N, Markowitz S, *et al.* Deletion of p16 and p15 genes in brain tumors. *Cancer Res* 1994; 54: 6353–8.

48. Izumoto S, Arita N, Ohnishi T, Hiraga S, Taki T, Hayakwa T. Homozygous deletion of p16INK4A/MTSl and p15INK4B/MTS2 genes in glioma cells and primary glioma tissues. *Cancer Lett* 1995; 97: 241–7.

49. Li Y, Hoang-Xuan K, Delattre J, Poisson M, Thomas G, Hamelin R. Frequent loss of heterozygosity on chromosome 9, and low incidence of mutations of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors p15 (MTS2) and p16 (MTSl) genes in gliomas. *Oncogene* 1995; 11: 597–600.

50. Ono Y, Tamiya T, Ichikawa T, Kunhishio K, Matsumoto K, Furuta T, *et al.* Malignant astrocytomas with homozygous CDKN2/p16 gene deletions have higher Ki-67 proliferation indices. *J Neuropathol Exp Neurol* 1996; 55: 1026–31.

51. Costello JF, Berger MS, Huang SH, Cavane WK. Silencing of p16/CDKN2 expression in human gliomas by methylation and chromatin condensation. *Cancer Res* 1996; 56: 2405–10.

52. Ueki K, Rubio M-P, Ramesh V, Correa KM, Rutter JL, von Deimling A, *et al.* MTS1/CDKN2 gene mutations are rare in primary human astrocytomas with allelic loss of chromosome 9p. *Hum Mol Genet* 1994; 3: 1841–5.

53. Ueki K, Ono Y, Henson JW, von Deimling A, Louis DN. CDKN1/p16 or RB alterations occur in the majority of glioblastomas and are inversely correlated. *Cancer Res* 1996; 56: 150–3.

54. He J, Olson JJ, James CD. Lack of p16INK4 or retinoblastoma protein (pRb), or amplification-associated overexpression of CDK4 is observed in distinct subsets of malignant glial tumors and cell lines. *Cancer Res* 1995; 55: 4833–6.

55. Henson JW, Schnitker BL, Correa KM, von Deimling A, Fassbender F, Xu H-J, *et al.* The retinoblastoma gene is involved in malignant progression of astrocytomas. *Ann Neurol* 1994; 36: 714–21.

56. Reifenberger G, Reifenberger J, Ichimura K, Melzter PS, Collins VP. Amplification of multiple genes from chromosomal region 12q13–14 in human malignant gliomas: preliminary mapping of the amplicons shows preferential involvement of CDK4, SAS and MDM2. *Cancer Res* 1994; 54: 4299–303.

57. Reifenberger G, Ichimura K, Reifenberger J, Elkahloun AG, Melzer PS, Collins VP. Refined mapping of 12q13–15 amplicons in malignant gliomas suggests CDK4/SAS and MDM2 as independent amplification targets. *Cancer Res* 1996; 56: 5141–5.

58. Rubio MP, Correa KM, Ueki K, Mohrenweiser HW, Gusella JF, von Deimling A, *et al.* The putative glioma tumor suppressor gene on chromosome 19q maps between APOC2 and HRC. *Cancer Res* 1994; 54: 4760–3.

59. von Deimling A, Louis DN, von Ammon K, Petersen I, Wiestler OD, Seizinger BR. Evidence for a tumor suppressor gene on chromosome 19q associated with human astrocytomas, oligodendrogliomas and mixed gliomas. *Cancer Res* 1992; 52: 4277–9.

60. von Deimling A, Nagel J, Bender B, Lenartz D, Schramm J, Louis DN, *et al.* Deletion mapping of chromosome 19 in human gliomas. *Int J Cancer* 1994; 57: 676–80.

61. Ueki K, Ramaswamy S, Billings SJ, Mohrenweiser HW, Louis DN. ANOVA, a putative astrocytic RNA-binding protein gene that maps to chromosome 19q13.3. *Neurogenetics*, in press.

62. Yong WH, Ueki K, Chou D, Reeves SA, von Deimling A, Gusella JF, *et al.* Cloning of a highly conserved human protein serine threonine phosphatase gene from the glioma candidate region on chromosome 19q13.3. *Genomics* 1995; 29: 533–6.

63. Ritland SR, Ganju V, Jenkins RB. Region-specific loss of heterozygosity on chromosome 19 is related to the morphologic type of human glioma. *Genes Chrom Cancer* 1995; 12: 277–82.

64. Ng HK, Lau KM, Tse JYM, Lo KW, Wong JHC, Poon WS, Huang DP. Combined molecular genetic studies of chromosome 22q and the neurofibromatosis type 2 gene in central nervous system tumors. *Neurosurgery* 1995; 37: 764–73.

65. Sonoda Y, Iizuka M, Yasuda J, Makino R, Ono T, Kayama T, *et al.* Loss of heterozygosity at 11p15 in malignant glioma. *Cancer Res* 1995; 55: 2166–8.

66. von Deimling A, Louis DN, Menon AG, von Ammon K, Petersen I, Ellison D, *et al.* Deletions on the long arm of chromosome 17 in pilocytic astrocytoma. *Acta Neuropathol* 1993; 86: 81–5.

67. Platten M, Giordana MJ, Driven CM, Gutmann DH, Louis DN. Up-regulation of specific NF1 gene transcripts in sporadic pilocytic astrocytomas. *Am J Pathol* 1996; 149: 621–7.

68. Patt S, Gries H, Giraldo M, Cervos Navarro J, Martin H, Janisch W, *et al.* p53 gene mutations in human astrocytic brain tumors including pilocytic astrocytomas. *Hum Pathol* 1996; 27: 586–9.

69. Bello MJ, Leone PE, Vaquero J, de Campos JM, Kusak ME, SarasajL, *et al.* Allelic loss at 1p and 19q frequently occurs in association and may represent early oncogenic events in oligodendroglial tumors. *Int J Cancer* 1995; 64: 207–10.

70. Kraus JA, Koopmann J, Kaskel JP, Maintz D, Brandner S, Schramm J, *et al.* Shared allelic losses on chromosomes 1p and 19q suggest a common origin of oligodendroglioma and oligoastrocytoma. *J Neuropathol Exp Neurol* 1995; 54: 91–5.

71. Reifenberger J, Reifenberger G, Liu L, James CD, Wechsler W, Collins VP. Molecular genetic analysis of oligodendroglial tumors

shows preferential allelic deletions on 19q and 1p. Am J Pathol 1994; 145: 1175–90.

72. Bello MJ, Vaquero J, de Campos JM, Kusak ME, Sarasa JL, Saez K, *et al.* Molecular analysis of chromosome 1 abnormalities in human gliomas reveals frequent loss of 1p in oligodendrogliomas. Int J Cancer 1994; 57: 172–5.

73. Ohgaki H, Eibl RH, Wiestler OD, Yasargil MG, Newcomb EW, Kleihues P. p53 mutations in nonastrocytic human brain tumors. Cancer Res 1991; 512: 6202–5.

74. Tong CYK, Lam PYP, Pang J, Ng HK. Analysis of p53 and MDM2 gene abnormalities in oligodendrogliomas and ependymomas. Proceedings of the Conference of Tumor Suppressor Gene of the American Association of Cancer Research, September 26–30 1997, Victoria, Canada.

75. Reifenberger J, Reifenberger G, Ichimura K, Schmidt EE, Wechsler W, Collins VP. Epidermal growth factor receptor expression in oligodendroglial tumors. Am J Pathol 1996; 149: 29–35.

76. Birch BD, Johnson JP, Parsa A, Desai RD, Yoon JT, Lycette CA, *et al.* Frequent type 2 neurofibromatosis gene transcript mutations in sporadic intramedullary spinal cord ependymomas. Neurosurgery 1996; 39: 135–40.

77. Rubio MP, Correa KM, Ramesh V, MacCollin MM, Jacoby LB, von Deimling A, *et al.* Analysis of the neurofibromatosis 2 gene in human ependymomas and astrocytomas. Cancer Res 1994; 54: 45–7.

78. von Haken MS, White EC, Daneshvar Shyesther L, Sih S, Choi E, Kalra R, *et al.* Molecular genetic analysis of chromosome arm 17p and chromosome arm 22q DNA sequences in sporadic pediatric ependymomas. Genes Chrom Cancer 1996; 17: 37–44.

79. Fink KL, Rushing EJ, Schold SC Jr, Nisen PD. Infrequency of p53 gene mutations in ependymomas. J Neuro-oncol 1996; 27: 111–5.

80. Zang KD. Cytological and cytogenetical studies on human meningiomas. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1982; 6: 249–74.

81. Ruttledge MH, Sarrazin J, Rangaratanam S, Phelan CM, Twist E, Merel P, *et al.* Evidence for the complete inactivation of the NF2 gene in the majority of sporadic meningiomas. Nature Genet 1994; 6: 180–4.

82. Lekanne Deprez RH, Bianchi AB, Groen NA, Seizinger BR, Hagemeijer A, van Drunen E, *et al.* Frequent NF2 gene transcript mutations in sporadic meningiomas and vestibular schwannomas. Am J Hum Genet 1994; 54: 1022–9.

83. Wellenreuther R, Kraus JA, Lenaretz D, Menon AG, Schramm J, Louis DN, *et al.* Analysis of the neurofibromatosis 2 gene reveals molecular variants of meningiomas. Am J Pathol 1995; 146: 827–32.

84. Tse JYM, Ng HK, Lau KM, Lo KW, Poon WS, Huang DP. Loss of heterozygosity of chromosome 14q in low- and high-grade meningiomas. Hum Pathol 1997; 28: 779–85.

85. Rempel SA, Schwechheimer K, Davies RL, Cavenee WK, Rosenblum ML. Loss of heterozygosity for loci on chromosome 10 is associated with morphologically malignant meningioma progression. Cancer Res 1993; 53: 2386–92.

86. Cairncross JG, Macdonald DR, Ramsay DA. Aggressive oligodendroglioma. A chemosensitive tumor. Neurosurgery 1992; 81: 78–82.

87. Glass J, Hochberg FH, Gruber ML, Louis DN, Smith D, Rattner B. The treatment of oligodendrogliomas and mixed oligodendroglioma-astrocytoma with PCV chemotherapy. J Neurosurg 1992; 76: 741–5.

88. Birchmeier C, Sharma S, Wigler M. Expression and rearrangement of the ROS1 gene in human glioblastoma cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1987; 84: 9270–4.

89. Fischer U, Muller HW, Sattler HP, Feiden K, Zang KD, Meese E. Amplification of the MET gene in glioma. Genes Chrom Cancer 1995; 12: 63–5.

90. Diedrich U, Eckermann O, Schmidtke J. Rare Ha-ras and c-mos alleles in patients with intracranial tumors. Neurology 1988; 38: 587–9.

91. Takenaka N, Mikoshiba K, Takamatsu K, Tsukada YM, Ohtani M, Toya S. Immunohistochemical detection of the gene product of Rous sarcoma virus in human brain tumor. Brain Res 1985; 337: 201–7.

92. Fujimoto M, Weaker FJ, Herbert DC, Sharp ZD, Sheridan PJ, Story JL. Expression of three viral oncogenes (v-sis, v-myc, v-fos) in primary human brain tumors of neuroectodermal origin. Neurology 1988; 38: 289–93.

93. Fuller GN, Bigner SH. Amplified cellular oncogenes in neoplasms of the human central nervous system. Mutat Res 1992; 276: 299–306.

94. Bigner SH, Burger PC, Wong AJ, Werner MH, Hamilton SR, Mulbaier LH, *et al.* Gene amplification in malignant human gliomas: clinical and histopathologic aspects. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1988; 47: 191–205.

95. Kinzler K, Bigner SH, Bigner DD, Trent JM, Law ML, O’Brien SJ, *et al.* Identification of an amplified, highly expressed gene in a human glioma. Science 1987; 236: 70–3.
