
# Review
## Asparagine-linked glycosylation in the yeast Golgi

### Neta Dean*
#### Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Institute for Cell and Developmental Biology, State University of New York, Stony Brook, NY 11794-5215, USA

Received 20 August 1998; accepted 20 August 1998

---

### Abstract

The Golgi complex is the site where the terminal carbohydrate modification of proteins and lipids occurs. These carbohydrates play a variety of biological roles, ranging from the stabilization of glycoprotein structure to the provision of ligands for cell-cell interactions to the regulation of cell surface properties. Progress in our understanding of the biosynthesis and regulation of glycoconjugates has been accelerating at a rapid pace. Recent advances in the field of yeast glycobiology have been particularly impressive. This review focuses on glycosylation of proteins in the Golgi of the yeast *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*, with emphasis on the candidate mannosyltransferases that participate in the synthesis of N-linked oligosaccharides. Current views on how these enzymes may be regulated and how glycosylation relates to other cellular processes are also discussed. © 1999 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.

### Keywords: Yeast; Golgi; Glycosylation; Mannosyltransferase; Glycosyltransferase

---

### Contents

1. **Introduction** ..... 310
2. **Detection of yeast glycosylation mutants impaired in outer chain biosynthesis** ..... 310
3. **Candidate mannosyltransferases that function in N-linked outer chain biosynthesis**
   - 3.1. Overview ..... 311
   - 3.2. *OCH1* encodes the initiating α1,6-mannosyltransferase ..... 313
   - 3.3. *HOCL* encodes a protein similar to Och1p ..... 314
4. **Elongation of the N-linked outer chain backbone**
   - 4.1. Overview ..... 315
   - 4.2. *MNN9* ..... 315
   - 4.3. *VAN1/VRG7/VRG1* ..... 316
   - 4.4. *ANP1/MNN8* ..... 316
   - 4.5. Mnn9p containing protein complexes function in outer chain elongation ..... 316
   - 4.6. *MNN10* ..... 317

---

*Fax: +1 (516) 632-8575; E-mail: ndean@mcbsgi.bio.sunysb.edu*

0304-4165/99/$–see front matter © 1999 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.

PII: S0304-4165(98)00132-9

BBAGEN 24723 18-12-98

N. Dean / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1426 (1999) 309–322

5. Extension of the backbone of the outer chain ..... 318
   5.1. Overview ..... 318
   5.2. MNN1 ..... 318
   5.3. mnn2, mnn3 and mnn5 ..... 318
6. Regulation of glycosylation in the Golgi ..... 318
   6.1. Determinants of chain termination ..... 318
   6.2. Nucleotide sugar transport into the Golgi ..... 319
7. Conclusions ..... 320
References ..... 320

---

### 1. Introduction

The Golgi complex serves as the principal site within a cell for the terminal carbohydrate modifications of proteins and lipids. Following the initial steps of asparagine (*N*)-linked oligosaccharide biosynthesis in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), glycoproteins are transported to the Golgi. Here, they are progressively and sequentially modified by a series of glycosyltransferases that reside in the different Golgi cisternae [1]. While the structure of the *N*-linked core oligosaccharide that is formed in the ER has been remarkably well conserved, the terminal modifications that occur in the Golgi vary a great deal, both among organisms and among proteins within a given organism (see [2, 3] for recent reviews on glycosylation). In the budding yeast, *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*, the maturation of *N*-linked oligosaccharides in the Golgi consists entirely of mannose additions. Some *N*-linked oligosaccharides are extended to form hypermannosylated glycoproteins with outer chains that may contain up to 200 mannose units. The linear backbone of the outer chain contains 50 or more mannoses in an α1,6-linkage. Addition of α1,2- and α1,3-linked mannoses results in a highly branched structure [4, 5]. The outer chain also contains several mannose phosphate residues that endow the oligosaccharide with a net negative charge ([6]; for a review see Jigami and Odani, this issue). These polymanose structures are primarily found on secreted or cell wall mannoproteins and may contribute up to 95% of the molecular mass of these glycoproteins. In contrast, most intracellular glycoproteins somehow escape these modifications and their maturation is more limited, yielding short oligosaccharides that contain Man₉GlcNAc₂ [7].

The biosynthetic pathway of *N*-linked outer chain oligosaccharides in *S. cerevisiae* has been deduced largely from the analysis of *mnn* mutants [4]. These mutants were isolated based on changes in cell surface carbohydrate structure [8, 9] and have since been shown to be affected in the biosynthesis of the outer chain portion of *N*-linked oligosaccharides [4, 9–11]. The analyses of oligosaccharides in these mutants culminated in a consensus for the structure of *N*-linked carbohydrates in *S. cerevisiae* [4, 12, 13] (Fig. 1) (see Gemill and Trimble, this volume).

In the past five years, the study of glycosylation in yeast has accelerated rapidly from a descriptive analysis of carbohydrate structure to a molecular analysis of the proteins that regulate, and in some cases catalyze, these reactions. These advances have been largely due to technical innovations in molecular biology and the availability of mutants. The completion of the *S. cerevisiae* genome sequence has been especially advantageous in expediting the identification of proteins that are predicted to be involved in glycosylation based upon their homology to known glycosyltransferases. This review will focus on glycosylation in the Golgi of the yeast *S. cerevisiae*, with an emphasis on the candidate mannosyltransferases that participate in the synthesis of *N*-linked oligosaccharides. Current views on how these enzymes may be regulated and how glycosylation relates to other cellular processes will also be discussed.

---

### 2. Detection of yeast glycosylation mutants impaired in outer chain biosynthesis

The identification of genes whose products regulate *N*-linked outer chain biosynthesis has come

mainly from the isolation of glycosylation mutants. The general approach for detecting glycosylation defects has involved monitoring an alteration of some cell surface property. Most of these mutants were detected in a selection designed by Ballou and colleagues to immunologically detect mutants with alterations in cell surface carbohydrate structures [4]. Because the terminal α1,3-linked mannose units that decorate oligosaccharides are particularly immunogenic, serum from rabbits into which whole yeast are injected is enriched for antibodies that recognize this α1,3-linked mannose epitope [8]. This antiserum agglutinates normal yeast causing them to precipitate out of solution, while mutant yeast lacking this epitope remain in suspension. This type of approach, using antisera directed against different epitopes, eventually led to the isolation of *mnn1*, *mnn2*, *mnn3*, *mnn4*, *mnn5*, *mnn6*, *mnn7*, *mnn8*, *mnn9*, and *mnn10* [9]. They were named *mnn* to denote the change in the cell surface content of mannan, a major component of the yeast cell wall in the form of mannoprotein. Mannan is the name given to the aggregate of mannoproteins in the cell wall analogous to the glycocalyx. Ballou [4] gives an excellent review of the isolation and characterization of the *mnn* mutants.

Other screens utilized the charge provided to the cell surface by the mannosylphosphate units to identify mutant cells that fail to bind charged molecules, such as alcian blue or anion exchange resins [4, 14, 15]. This approach identified mutants defective in the addition of the mannosylphosphate, such as *mnn4* and *mnn6* (see Jigami and Odani, this issue, for a review on mannosylphosphate additions) and the 'low dye binding' (*ldb*) mutants, which are generally defective in outer chain biosynthesis [15].

A cell wall component whose loss of function has been used for mutant detection is the killer toxin receptor. The receptor requires β1,6-glucan and O-linked oligosaccharide biosynthesis for function [16]. Resistance to killer toxin led to the isolation of the *ktr* and *kre* mutants (killer toxin resistant and ktr related, respectively), some of which affect N-linked oligosaccharide modifications (see Lussier and Bussey, this issue, for a review).

Resistance to sodium orthovanadate has also proven to be effective for the enrichment of glycosylation mutants. This drug is normally toxic to yeast,

although the basis for resistance is not well understood. Nevertheless, this selection has yielded the *van* (vanadate), *vrg* (vanadate resistant glycosylation) and *vig* (vanadate resistant and immature glycosylation) mutants, all of which are affected in glycosylation [17–23]. One explanation for resistance is that a molecule that prevents the uptake of vanadate or that increases the removal of a toxic metabolite requires glycosylation for its activity. However, this putative detoxifier has not been identified amongst the vanadate-resistant mutants thus isolated. Therefore it seems more likely that it is the effect of the general lack of mannosylation or the resulting accumulation of intermediates of sugar metabolism, such as GDP-mannose, that may account for resistance to vanadate.

Only a handful of glycosylation mutants with defects in outer chain exhibit any severe growth phenotype which hindered the cloning of the corresponding normal genes for many years. A useful discovery was that many glycosylation mutants are sensitive to aminoglycosides such as hygromycin B, neomycin and geneticin [19, 24, 25]. Complementation of the aminoglycoside sensitivity allowed some of these genes to be isolated [20–23]. Recently, sensitivity to neomycin was also used to isolate a large number of *nes* mutants, all of which directly or indirectly affect mannosylation [25].

## 3. Candidate mannosyltransferases that function in N-linked outer chain biosynthesis

### 3.1. Overview

In the past five years there has been a dramatic increase in the number of genes that have been isolated by complementation of the mutants described above. For the reasons outlined below, some of these gene products are predicted to participate directly in outer chain biosynthesis, though few have been directly proven to possess mannosyltransferase activity. These candidate Golgi mannosyltransferases are listed in Table 1.

As more of these genes are being isolated, an emerging pattern of redundancy among yeast Golgi glycosyltransferases is becoming increasingly apparent [26, 27]. All of the putative Golgi mannosyltrans-

# Glycosylation Process Diagram

## Key Components and Legend

- **p = phosphate**
- **□ = β-GlcNAc**
- **● = α1,6 Man**
- **⊗ = α1,2-Man**
- **○ = β1,4-Man**
- **∅ = α1,3 Man**
- **○ = α-man**
- **n_average = 10**

---

### ER (Endoplasmic Reticulum)

#### Early Stage
- **OCH1**

#### Medial Stage
- **M₂MT-I**

---

### Golgi Apparatus

#### Early Stage
- **MNN9**
- **VAN1**

##### Process: α1,6 mannose initiation

#### Medial Stage
- **MNN9**
- **ANP1/MNN8**
- **MNN10**
- **MNN11**
- **HOC1?**

##### Process: α1,6 mannose elongation

#### Late Stage
- **MNN2**

##### Process: α1,2 mannose substitution

#### Further Elongation
- **MNN5, MNN6, KRE2**
- **KTR1, KTR2**
- **KTR3, YUR1**

##### Process: Mannosylphosphate; α1,2 mannose substitution

#### Final Stage
- **MNN1**

##### Process: α1,3 mannose termination

---

### Final Structures
- **CORE-TYPE**
- **POLYMANNOSE TYPE**

---

### Notes
- The diagram shows the sequential steps of mannose addition and modification in the Golgi apparatus.
- The symbols represent different sugar residues and their linkages.
- The processes are labeled with specific enzymes or proteins involved.

---

### Reference
N. Dean / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1426 (1999) 309–322

BBAGEN 24723 18-12-98

Fig. 1. A model for the structure and biosynthetic pathway of *S. cerevisiae* N-linked oligosaccharides in the Golgi. The proposed oligosaccharide structures and biosynthetic intermediates are based primarily upon determinations described by Ballou [4] and Trimble and Atkinson [13]. The structures of both the mature ‘core’ type oligosaccharide and the polymannose type are illustrated. The assignment of the step at which each candidate mannosyltransferase gene acts is based both on its mutant phenotype and/or characterization of its protein product (see text for references). A multi-step process is proposed for the elongation of the α1,6 backbone, where several α1,6-mannoses and a single α1,2-mannose are first added in a reaction catalyzed by a protein complex that contains both Mnn9p and Van1 [48]. The elaboration of the backbone may also occur in several stages by complexes that contain other α1,6-mannosyltransferases, indicated by several arrows. The order of addition of mannose phosphate and secondary α1,2-mannose residues is not known, hence these reactions are grouped together. Though these reactions are broadly categorized as early, medial or late, the localization profile of each of these enzymes within successive Golgi cisternae has not been well defined. The Och1p catalyzed initiation reaction is taken to define the *cis*-most compartment and the Mnn1p catalyzed termination reaction is taken to define a late processing compartment.

---

Ferases identified so far define groups that contain two or more related members (Table 1). Strikingly, no example of an ‘unrelated’ Golgi mannosyltransferase yet exists. This redundancy suggests that these proteins perform related or overlapping functions and/or that certain glycosyltransferases are specific for particular proteins. In some extreme cases, as has been seen for the nine-membered *KRE2* family, mutant phenotypes may not be uncovered unless multiple mutations occur in several members simultaneously (Lussier and Bussey, this issue). This redundancy may help to explain why the activity of so few Golgi transferases has yet been defined. The existence of multiple transferases may obscure the loss or gain of protein function both in vivo and in vitro. Therefore, researchers must rely upon demonstrating activity from purified protein or expression in heterologous systems, which may present a formidable challenge.

Despite the lack of demonstrated enzymatic activity, it is likely that many of the proteins predicted to be mannosyltransferases do, in fact, participate in these reactions. In the following section, the function of each of the candidate mannosyltransferases is discussed, as are the data that support their role in oligosaccharide synthesis.

### 3.2. OCH1 encodes the initiating α1,6-mannosyltransferase

Synthesis of the outer chain begins when a single mannose is added onto the Man₈GlcNAc₂ core structure in the Golgi, a reaction catalyzed by the Och1 protein (Fig. 1) [28–31]. This mannose then serves as the scaffold for the further extension of the outer chain. The Man₈GlcNAc₂ substrate is a direct product of the processing events that occur in the ER. Following its assembly and transfer to protein, the Glu₃Man₉GlcNAc₂ core oligosaccharide is trimmed by ER glucosidases and an ER mannosidase to yield Man₈GlcNAc₂ [32–34] (for review on processing see Herscovics, this issue). No protein-bound biosynthetic intermediates smaller than Man₈GlcNAc₂ have been detected nor is there any evidence for any Golgi localized mannosidases in *S. cerevisiae* [33,35]. Thus, it appears that in this yeast, unlike higher eukaryotes, there is no further trimming of the core prior to the formation of the outer chain in the Golgi.

Though it is feasible that Och1p could also participate in the subsequent elongation of the backbone, it does not do so [36,37]. Och1p appears to be unique among the known Golgi mannosyltransferases in that it has a very narrow substrate preference. It cannot use the small substrates that are conventionally used to assay mannosyl transfer, such as α-methylmannoside, α1,6-mannobiose or mannotetraose [37,38]. Its preferred substrate, in vivo and in vitro, is Man₈GlcNAc₂ [38,39]. As long as they have the correct α1,3-mannose, incompletely assembled core structures in the ER can still support outer chain initiation in vivo, although the use of these substrates result in a reduction of Och1p activity in vitro [38,40].

It was reported that null alleles of *och1* are viable but display temperature sensitive lethality [31]. This observation has been used to argue that N-linked outer chain biosynthesis is not essential. However, it is important to note that the *OCH1* gene is essential in some strain backgrounds, though it is not

Table 1  
Putative yeast mannosyltransferases and related genes  

| Gene family       | Related member          | Probable function                              | Reference     |
|-------------------|-------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|---------------|
| MNN1              | YIL014W                 | α1,3-terminating mannosyltransferase          | [4,56,71]      |
|                   | YGL257C                 | ?                                             |               |
|                   | YNR059W                 | ?                                             |               |
|                   | YJL186W                 | ?                                             |               |
|                   | TTP1/YBR015c            | ?                                             |               |
| KRE2/MNT1         | KTR1                    | α1,2-mannosyltransferase                      | [92,93]       |
|                   | KTR2                    | α1,2-mannosyltransferase                      | [94–96]       |
|                   | KTR3                    | ?                                             | [96]          |
|                   | KTR4                    | ?                                             | [95]          |
|                   | KTR5                    | ?                                             | [26]          |
|                   | KTR6/MNN6               | Mannosylphosphate transferase                 | [26,97]       |
|                   | KTR7                    | ?                                             | [26]          |
|                   | YUR1                    | ?                                             | [96]          |
| MNN9              | MNN8/ANP1/MCD2          | α1,6-mannosyltransferase                      | [4,56]        |
|                   | VAN1/VRG1/VRG7          | α1,6-or α1,2-mannosyltransferase              | [4,51]        |
| MNN10/BED1/SLC2   | MNN11/YJL183w           | ?α1,6-mannosyltransferase                     | [4,21,53,98]  |
| OCH1              | HOC1                    | α1,6 initiating mannosyltransferase           | [30,31]       |
|                   | SUR1/CSG1/BCL21/YBR161w | Sphingolipid mannosyltransferase              | [44]          |

clear what accounts for these strain-dependent via-  
sensitivity to calcofluor white and hygromycin B,  
bility differences [41]. This demonstrates that in some  
and resistance to sodium vanadate. However, no obvious defect in N-linked or O-linked glycosylation  
strain backgrounds, the Och1p catalyzed modification is essential.  
can be detected [41]. Although Hoc1p and Och1p  
are related, they are not functionally redundant since  
the overexpression of HOC1 cannot suppress an  
och1 mutation and vice versa [41].  

3.3. HOC1 encodes a protein similar to Och1p  
Hoc1p and Och1p also share more limited homology with several other yeast proteins, including the  
Several yeast proteins are related in sequence to  
product of the SUR1/CSG1 gene. SUR1 affects  
Och1p. The protein most similar to Och1p is  
sphingolipid mannosylation and sur1 mutants lack  
Hoc1p, a type II membrane protein that localizes  
mannosylated inositolphosphorylceramides [44].  
to the Golgi [41]. The HOC1 gene was isolated as  
Since mannosylation of sphingolipids is known to  
a high-copy suppressor of a protein kinase C (PKC)  
occur in the Golgi [45, 46], it is tempting to speculate  
mutant [41]. It has been recognized for some time  
that SUR1 encodes a Golgi localized mannosyltransferase.  
that mutations in the PKC signaling pathway affect  
cell wall integrity and that pkc1 mutants display a  
lysosome phenotype due to osmotic fragility [42, 43].  
Genetic and biochemical studies suggest that  
The suppression of pkc1, coupled with its similarity to OCH1, suggests a role for HOC1 in cell wall  
Hoc1p interacts with other putative mannosyltransferases. Hoc1p has recently been found to reside in a  
biosynthesis. hoc1Δ mutants exhibit phenotypes that  
complex that also contains Anpl/Mnn8, Mnn9 and  
are associated with glycosylation defects including

an Mnn10 related protein, Mnn11 [47, 48] (see below). This complex of proteins has mannosyltransferase activity, but whether Hoc1p directly contributes to this activity is unknown [48]. A synthetic phenotype is displayed in *hoc1 mnn10* double mutants (A. Mook and N. Dean, unpublished), an observation which may indicate that the two proteins interact. The function of Hoc1p is still unclear. Hoc1p may be a protein specific transferase, perform a function that overlaps with another glycosyltransferase, or function only under certain conditions.

### 4. Elongation of the N-linked outer chain backbone

#### 4.1. Overview

A number of different mutants that accumulate shortened outer chain backbones have been isolated. In some cases, mutant alleles of the same gene have been identified by different groups. These overlaps are noted in Table 1, but for the sake of simplicity, the original designation(s) will be used in describing a mutant or protein.

The best candidates for mannosyltransferases that are involved in the elongation of the backbone of the outer chain fall into two families of related genes. These include the *MNN9, ANP1/MNN8, VAN1* family and the *MNN10, MNN11* family. These genes encode type II membrane proteins, a distinguishing feature of all known glycosyltransferases that reside in the Golgi in higher eukaryotes [49]. Mutations in any of these genes causes the accumulation of glycoproteins with truncated backbones [4, 9, 18, 19, 21, 50, 51]. Each of these proteins resides in the Golgi [21, 47, 48]. Although these data are consistent with the idea that these proteins are glycosyltransferases, it has been hypothesized that their effect on mannosylation is indirect. Until recently, the prevailing model is that mutations in *anp1/mnn8, mnn9*, and *van1* perturb the organization of the Golgi and by doing so, indirectly affect glycoprotein modifications [11, 19, 51, 52]. Several arguments appear to support this idea. First, mutant strains lacking these gene products are not depleted for mannosyltransferase activity in vitro [4]. Second, several of these proteins, when over-expressed, were reported to be localized in the ER, a location that is obviously incompatible

with a role as a Golgi mannosyltransferase [51, 53]. Third, the oligosaccharide structures that accumulate as a result of some of these mutations, e.g., that of *mnn9* and *van1*, are inconsistent with a simple loss of α1,6-mannosyltransferase elongating activity [19, 52, 54].

In light of the recent characterization of these proteins and an appreciation of the previously unrecognized degree of redundancy that exists among glycosyltransferases, this model must be re-evaluated. First, the fact that the loss of any single gene product may not eliminate transferase activity in vitro is no longer surprising. Up to now, Och1p and Mnn1p are the only examples of yeast Golgi mannosyltransferases that display unique activities. Second, recent studies demonstrate that all of these proteins reside in the Golgi complex [21, 47, 48]. Third, a novel discovery is that these proteins do not function alone, but rather as hetero-oligomeric complexes [47, 48]. Thus, one mutant component may have multiple effects and result in unanticipated structures.

Below is a brief description of the *MNN9, ANP1/MNN8, VAN1*, and *MNN10* gene products and their mutant phenotypes, followed by a discussion of the current views and models concerning their role in N-linked outer chain elongation.

#### 4.2. MNN9

The *mnn9* mutation allows the addition of a single α1,6-linked initiating mannose to Man₈GlcNAc₂ (catalyzed by Och1p), but prevents further elongation of the backbone. In addition to the α1,6-linked initiating mannose, the *mnn9* oligosaccharide terminates with an α1,2-linked mannose that has been proposed to serve as a 'stop' signal that prevents chain elongation (see below) [11, 52]. In this regard, the *mnn9* oligosaccharide resembles the short, core-like oligosaccharide that is characteristic of some intracellular glycoproteins [7, 54].

The *mnn9* mutation is epistatic to, or 'masks' both the *mnn8* and *mnn10* mutations. A strain defective in both *mnn9* and *mnn8* displays the *mnn9* phenotype; similarly the *mnn9 mnn10* double mutant looks like *mnn9* [11, 50, 55]. These data imply that *MNN8, MNN9* and *MNN10* function in a common pathway and that *MNN9* acts before *MNN8* or *MNN10*. Like

och1, the mnn9 mutant displays a severe growth phenotype [9, 56] although the only reported deletion mutant is viable. The MNN9 gene encodes a 46 kDa type II membrane protein that resides in the Golgi [47, 48, 56].

### 4.3. VAN1/VRG7/VRGI

van1 was originally isolated as a mutant that displays an alteration in protein phosphorylation and this phenotype remains unexplained [17]. VAN1 encodes a 61 kDa protein whose role in glycosylation was uncovered after it was found to display sequence homology to the MNN9 gene product [56]. There is considerable overlap among the van, vrg, and mnn mutants and complementation analyses have demonstrated that van1 is allelic to vrg1 and vrg7 (C.E. Ballou, personal communication). A mutation in VAN1 results in an mnn9-like oligosaccharide [18, 19]. In addition, van1 mutants lack internal α1,2-mannose branching, though some chains contain the terminal α1,2-linked mannose 'stop signal' [19]. The van1 phenotype therefore suggests a role in backbone elongation and/or in the addition of α1,2-branching mannoses.

### 4.4. ANP1/MNN8

mnn8 mutants accumulate glycoproteins with backbones containing 6–16 mannoses [9]. The MNN8 gene was isolated by complementation of its hygromycin B drug sensitivity and demonstrated to be allelic to ANP1 (N. Dean, unpublished). The ANP1 gene was identified through its complementation of a mutant that fails to retain an Mnt1p reporter protein in the Golgi [51]. This phenotype suggests that the anp1 mutation causes an alteration of Golgi structure but how this occurs is unknown. It may be that the resident enzymes themselves are involved in maintaining the Golgi structure. Anp1p was reported to localize in the ER [51], but this anomalous localization arises from over-expressing the protein. When the endogenous Anp1 protein was examined, it clearly resided in the Golgi [47, 48]. The sequence similarities between Anp1p, Mnn9p and Van1p, as well as their mutant phenotypes suggest that these proteins perform related functions. In the case of anp1 and van1, genetic

data support this notion, as these mutations result in synthetic lethality when combined [51].

### 4.5. Mnn9p containing protein complexes function in outer chain elongation

The sequence similarity between Anp1p, Mnn9p and Van1p raises the possibility that these proteins may interact with one another. This notion was experimentally verified as these proteins co-immunoprecipitate with one another [47, 48]. The observation that these proteins also co-localize in the Golgi suggests that their interaction with one another has a physiological basis [48]. Using a co-immunoprecipitation approach, additional components in these precipitates have been identified. Two distinct protein complexes can be identified, both of which contain Mnn9p. The Mnn9p/Anp1p complex also contains Hoc1p and a novel Mnn10p related protein designated Mnn11. The second complex contains Mnn9p and Van1p [47, 48]. Importantly, the immunoprecipitates are capable of adding multiple α1,6-linked mannose residues to an α1,6-mannobiose acceptor, as well as α1,2-mannose branches [48]. These data suggest a model where elongation of the outer chain occurs in at least two steps [48] (Fig. 1). Since van1 mutants are altered in α1,2 branching [19], it is tempting to speculate that Van1p may contribute to the observed α1,2 activity. These results demonstrate that proteins within these complexes directly participate in sugar addition. Though there are many other additional proteins in the precipitate, the implication is that Anp1, Mnn9, Van1, Hoc1 and Mnn11 are mannosyltransferases that function in outer chain elongation. Proof of this idea will require the reconstitution of complex activity.

What benefit may complex formation confer to the cell? An association with other proteins could endow a glycosyltransferase with additional specificities towards its protein or carbohydrate substrates. The notion that glycosyltransferases are protein specific has precedence. For instance, the individual members of the six-membered PMT family of mannosyltransferases that participate in O-linked glycosylation clearly display overlapping but distinct substrate specificities, with regard to protein [57]. Interestingly, two members of the Pmt family, Pmt1p and Pmt2p, have also been shown to form heterodimers

[58] suggesting that the role of multi-protein complexes in glycosylation may not be uncommon. There is some evidence to suggest that for N-linked glycosylation, Van1p acts on only a subset of glycoproteins. Strains carrying the *van1* mutation accumulate truncated invertase, yet still react with an anti-α1,3-mannose serum [19]. This result implies that *van1* affects invertase but not all cell wall mannoproteins.

The associations between proteins in a complex may also influence their localization, either to a particular cisterna within the Golgi or for transport out of the ER. Since oligomeric assembly probably occurs in the ER, any excess monomer lacking partner(s) may fail to exit and thus accumulate in the ER. This idea is consistent with the observed mislocalization of Anplp, Mnn9p, and Mnn10p to the ER when these proteins are over-expressed [47, 48, 51, 53] and should be taken as a precaution to researchers studying these types of proteins.

Finally, the elaborate carbohydrate structures that arise from the sequential action of glycosyltransferases have long been hypothesized to arise from a 'treadmill' arrangement of glycosyltransferases [59–61]. This hypothesis is difficult to prove because of the experimental difficulty in distinguishing between complexes that are formed in vivo and non-specific protein aggregations that may be formed in vitro. The demonstration that these complexes exist in yeast, where the availability of mutants provides an experimental tool that can be used to eliminate in vitro artifacts, suggests that this earlier hypothesis may be well founded.

### 4.6. MNN10

Strains carrying mutations in *mnn10* accumulate heterogeneous outer chains similar to those found in *mnn8*, in which 6–16 mannoses are added to the backbone. However, in *mnn10* mutants, the chains are of a somewhat narrower size range [11]. The *MNN10* gene was isolated by complementation of the *mnn10* hygromycin B sensitivity [21]. Mnn10p is related to a family of *S. pombe* proteins, one of which is the well characterized α1,2-galactosyltransferase, gma12p [62, 63]. This sequence similarity suggests that Mnn10p may also be a transferase. Since N-linked oligosaccharides in *S. cerevisiae* do not contain detectable levels of galactose, it was proposed

that the homology between gma12p and Mnn10p reflects a common acceptor rather than a common nucleotide sugar donor [21]. Searches of the *S. cerevisiae* databases identified another Mnn10-related protein, designated Mnn11p. It is likely that Mnn11p also catalyzes sugar additions since it is complexed with Anplp and Mnn9p [48].

A number of studies over the last few years suggest that it is no longer appropriate to consider oligosaccharide biosynthesis as a simple housekeeping function. For instance, the identification of *MNN10* as *BED1* (bud emergence delay) is suggestive of the link between glycosylation and the regulation of morphogenesis [53]. During growth, yeast cells undergo a dramatic switch from isotropic to polarized growth that insures localized cell wall deposition in the recipient bud [64]. Growth polarity presumably arises because secretory vesicles are directed to the bud site in a process dependent on actin [65]. A checkpoint that monitors this event is mediated by inhibition of the mitotic cyclin genes, *CLB1* and *CLB2*, whose over-expression causes this checkpoint to be overridden [66]. *bed1* was identified in a search for mutants that can only survive in the presence of this morphogenetic checkpoint. When combined with over-expression of Clb2, a mutation in *bed1* is lethal [53]. A recent extension of this screen identified five more genes whose products are similarly implicated in regulating morphogenesis. Remarkably, all six genes affect glycosylation. These genes include *MNN10, ANP1/MNN8, VRG4, SEC53, SEC3*, and *SEC5* as well as one uncharacterized ORF, *YKL165c* [67]. Reconstruction of this defect, using the *mnn9Δ* and *och1Δ* mutations, further implicate glycosylation as the primary effector. Several models were proposed to account for these results. One model is simply that a regulatory protein that mediates polarized growth requires glycosylation to function [67]. However, this putative regulator was not identified in this screen. Another model is that the outer chain itself provides a signal to redirect secretory vesicles to the bud site during polarized growth [67]. While the topological constraints associated with a lumenally oriented carbohydrate transmitting a cytosolic signal make this model difficult to envisage, the idea that glycans themselves (or a byproduct of glycosylation) are somehow monitored to gauge growth is appealing.

5. Extension of the backbone of the outer chain

### 5.1. Overview

The backbone of the outer chain is substituted by the addition of α1,2- and α1,3-linked mannoses, as well as mannosylphosphates (Fig. 1). The proteins that participate in these branching reactions include Mnn1p, which catalyzes the addition of the terminal α1,3-mannoses; Kre2p, Ktr1p, Ktr2p, and Yur1p, which contain α1,2-transferase activity; and Mnn6p, which is the mannosylphosphate transferase. In addition, several other mutants, including *mnn2*, *mnn3*, and *mnn5*, have been isolated that are defective in these branching reactions, but the genes defined by these mutations have not been identified or characterized. Below is a brief description of *MNN1* and the *mnn2*, *mnn3*, and *mnn5* mutants. The reader is referred to articles in this issue which review the role of the Kre2 and Ktr proteins in glycosylation (Lussier and Bussey) and the role of Mnn6p during mannosylphosphate additions (Jigami).

### 5.2. *MNN1*

Early work by Ballou and colleagues demonstrated that the *mnn1* mutant lacks the α1,3-mannosyltransferase activity that is responsible for both N- and O-linked sugar modifications [68, 69]. The *MNN1* gene was cloned and its sequence predicts a type II integral membrane protein [56]. Four highly related members of the *MNN1* family have been found in the yeast genome sequence (see Table 1). Deletion of the *TTP1* gene has no effect on viability [70]. Other than *MNN1* and *TTP1*, no information has been reported about any of the other family members. Immunoprecipitates containing the Mnn1 protein exhibit α1,3-mannosyltransferase activity and this activity is lacking in *mnn1Δ* strains [71]. These results imply that Mnn1p is the sole provider of α1,3-mannosyltransferase activity and raise the question of what the other Mnn1-related proteins do. It may be that these Mnn1p-related proteins represent a minor fraction of the α1,3-mannosyltransferase activity in the cell that has escaped detection. Alternatively, these proteins may not be functional homologues of Mnn1p, as is seen in the case of Hoc1p and Och1p. Indeed, a phylogenetic analysis of these proteins indicates that Mnn1p sits on a branch separate from all of the other members of this family (N. Dean, unpublished). Mutational analysis and the isolation of these Mnn1-related proteins will be required to determine what their function is.

#### 5.3. *mnn2*, *mnn3*, and *mnn5*

Three other *mnn* mutants were identified that affect the addition of the α1,2-linked mannose branches [4, 72]. *mnn2* mutants are defective in the addition of α1,2-linked mannoses on the α1,6-mannose backbone. While the cloning of the *MNN2* gene was reported, no sequence information is available about the protein [73]. Lysates from cells in which this gene is over-expressed do not display increased mannosyltransferases activity [73]. It is unknown whether *MNN2* encodes a transferase or a regulatory protein.

*mnn5* mutants are defective in the addition of the second α1,2-linked mannose [4, 72]. *mnn3* mutants also are defective in branching reactions, but unlike *mnn2* and *mnn5*, lead to a general shortening of oligosaccharide chains on both N- and O-linked glycoproteins. Neither the *MNN3* nor the *MNN5* genes have been isolated, so it remains to be seen whether these genes encode transferases.

---

## 6. Regulation of glycosylation in the Golgi

### 6.1. Determinants of chain termination

A key step in the regulation of glycosylation is chain termination. The structural determinants that specify the elaboration of the shorter, core-type mannose structure versus the hypermannose type are not well understood and this area of research remains uncharted territory. Obviously, some information in the polypeptide sequence must relate this signal to the glycosylation machinery. That the core type N-linked oligosaccharides are more resistant to endoglycosidase H digestion implies that these regions of the polypeptide chain assume a more compact conformation [35].

It has been proposed that a single α1,2-linked mannose serves as a 'stop signal' for the termination of outer chain elongation [11, 52]. This is based on

the analyses of the oligosaccharide that accumulates in *mnn9*. This oligosaccharide contains a terminal α1,2-linked mannose and is inactive as an mannosyltransferase acceptor substrate [52]. As yet there are no candidate transferases that catalyze this terminal α1,2-linked mannose addition.

This ‘stop signal’ cannot be the complete answer, since some truncated oligosaccharides do not contain this terminal mannose [4]. Furthermore, there have been reports that the degree of elongation depends on the conditions used to culture yeast. Recombinant proteins expressed in *S. cerevisiae* can undergo core or polymannose type of modifications, depending on the nitrogen source in the culture medium [74]. Some endogenous proteins also display this bias. Secreted exoglucanase is one such example, where ‘old’ cultures secrete a different glycoform of the enzyme, compared to fresh cultures [75]. Clearly, the final outcome of oligosaccharide structure is dependent upon a number of factors in addition to the peptide backbone of the particular glycoprotein, including accessibility to specific glycosyltransferases, the transport rate of a glycoprotein through the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi complex, and the availability of substrates.

### 6.2. Nucleotide sugar transport into the Golgi

The donor for mannosylation in the Golgi is the nucleotide sugar GDP-mannose, whose site of synthesis is the cytoplasm [76,77]. Before it can be utilized by the lumenal mannosyltransferases, GDP-mannose must be transported into the Golgi by a specific nucleotide sugar transporter (see [78] for review). There is strong evidence that this GDP-mannose transporter in *S. cerevisiae* is encoded by the *VRG4* gene. All of mannosylation is affected by the *vrg4* mutation, so that both *N*- and *O*-linked glycoproteins as well as sphingolipids are affected. Golgi-derived vesicles from *vrg4* mutant strains are defective in the luminal uptake of GDP-mannose [22,79]. Vrg4p is an essential Golgi localized membrane protein that is part of a large family of related proteins [22,79–82]. Some of these proteins, including the *Leishmania donovani* Lpg2p [80,82] and the *Kluyveromyces lactis* Mnn2p [81,83] also participate in nucleotide sugar transport.

Since the terminal carbohydrate modifications in *S. cerevisiae* are restricted to mannose additions, the GDP-mannose transporter provides the cell with an easy target with which to regulate glycosylation in the Golgi. Indeed, the study of nucleotide sugar transporters promises to open some new avenues that lead to intersections between glycosylation and other regulatory pathways. For example, like some other genes that function in cell wall biosynthesis [84–86], the *VRG4* promoter contains several SCB (*SWI4/SWI6* cell cycle box) and MCB (*Mlu1* cell cycle box) transcriptional regulatory elements ([85] and J. Horecka, unpublished observation). Expression of the Vrg4 protein is tightly regulated during the cell cycle, peaking at the G1/S transition (N. Dean and J. Poster, unpublished), precisely when the new bud is emerging and the Golgi is being flooded with proteins whose mannosylation is demanded for de novo cell wall synthesis in the incipient bud. The regulated expression of Vrg4p may allow the cell to provide a common substrate for mannosyltransferases in the Golgi, and in so doing, regulate mannosylation.

Interestingly, several Vrg4 related yeast ORFs exist, suggesting that their gene products may also function as nucleotide sugar transporters [79]. In principle, yeast require only one GDP-mannose transporter during vegetative growth and Vrg4p appears to fulfill this role. So what do these other homologs encode? Several ideas can be entertained. The recent suggestion that β1,6-glucan is synthesized in the Golgi [87,88] implies the need for a distinct UDP-glucose transporter to supply glucose for the synthesis of these glycans. Another intriguing possibility is that nucleotide sugar transporters are developmentally regulated. For instance, deposition of nascent cell wall material is required for spore wall formation during sporulation. Presumably, high levels of mannoprotein biosynthesis must occur at this stage of development. If Vrg4 expression is restricted to the G1/S stage, it implies the existence of another, sporulation specific GDP-mannose transporter. Finally, recent results from Roy and Jigami demonstrate that *S. cerevisiae* has the capacity to transport UDP-galactose into the Golgi [89]. The physiological role played by a UDP-Gal transporter is unclear, since there is little evidence for galactose addition on glycoconjugates in *S. cerevisiae*. Though this transport activity may reflect the rare need for gal-

actose, another interesting possibility is that this activity is the property of a UDP-glucose transporter with a broad substrate specificity. The identification of the protein(s) responsible for this transport activity is anxiously awaited.

## 7. Conclusions

One hundred years have passed since Camillo Golgi described a new component of the cell that now bears his name. Since then, a multitude of studies examining the structure and function of the Golgi has established its central role in glycosylation. In spite of the fact that glycosylation is an essential modification that occurs in all eukaryotes, the precise function of oligosaccharides continues to puzzle us. The profound advances that have been made recently make evident that yeast provide an ideal model system to study the in vivo synthesis and function of oligosaccharides. While glycosylation in the yeast Golgi has diverged considerably from its mammalian counterpart, the study of Golgi mannosylation in yeast has and will continue to attract interest for several reasons. First, it seems likely that the mechanisms for maintaining the structure and function of the Golgi are conserved between yeast and mammals. Therefore yeast provides a genetically tractable system to understand how the Golgi glycosyltransferases are regulated in this organelle to provide it with its unique function. Second, the mannoprotein containing cell wall distinguishes the yeast cell from higher eukaryotes. It is therefore an attractive target for anti fungal drugs and therapies.

It has been suggested that the glycoprotein modifications that occur in the ER have evolved to promote protein folding, while those that occur in the Golgi have taken on other, more specialized functions [90]. Certainly the importance of outer chain glycans to the cell is underscored by the large number of proteins that are dedicated to their biosynthesis. In yeast there are currently over 120 genes or mutations known to affect cell wall and glycan biosynthesis [3,91]. The cell has clearly invested a great deal of energy in oligosaccharide biosynthesis. The remaining challenge is to understand why.

---

### References

[1] W.G. Dunphy, J.E. Rothman, Cell 42 (1985) 13–21.

[2] A. Varki, Glycobiology 3 (1993) 97–130.

[3] P. Orlean, in: Molecular and Cellular Biology of the Yeast, *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*, Vol. 3, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, 1997.

[4] C.E. Ballou, Methods Enzymol. 185 (1990) 440–470.

[5] A. Herscovics, P. Orlean, FASEB J. 7 (1993) 540–550.

[6] E.M. Karson, C.E. Ballou, J. Biol. Chem. 253 (1978) 6484–6492.

[7] L. Ballou, L.M. Hernandez, E. Alvarado, C.E. Ballou, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 87 (1990) 3368–3372.

[8] W.C. Raschke, K.A. Kern, C. Antalis, C.E. Ballou, J. Biol. Chem. 248 (1973) 4660–4666.

[9] L. Ballou, R.E. Cohen, C.E. Ballou, J. Biol. Chem. 255 (1980) 5986–5991.

[10] L. Ballou, P. Gopal, B. Krummel, M. Tammi, C.E. Ballou, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 83 (1986) 3081–3085.

[11] L. Ballou, E. Alvarado, P. Tsai, A. Dell, C.E. Ballou, J. Biol. Chem. 264 (1989) 11857–11864.

[12] R.B. Trimble, P.H. Atkinson, Glycobiology 2 (1992) 57–75.

[13] R.B. Trimble, P.H. Atkinson, J. Biol. Chem. 261 (1986) 9815–9824.

[14] W.D. Sikkema, L. Ballou, J. Letters, C.E. Ballou, Fed. Proc. Fed. Am. Soc. Exp. Biol. 41 (1982) 755.

[15] P. Manas, I. Olivero, M. Avalos, L.M. Hernandez, Glycobiology 7 (1997) 487–497.

[16] H. Bussey, Mol. Microbiol. 5 (1991) 2339–2343.

[17] C. Kanik-Ennulat, N. Neff, Mol. Cell. Biol. 10 (1990) 898–909.

[18] C. Kanik-Ennulat, E. Montalvo, N. Neff, Genetics 140 (1995) 933–943.

[19] L. Ballou, R.A. Hitzeman, M.S. Lewis, C.E. Ballou, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 88 (1991) 3209–3212.

[20] J.H. Chi, J. Roos, N. Dean, J. Biol. Chem. 271 (1996) 3132–3140.

[21] N. Dean, J. Poster, Glycobiology 6 (1996) 73–81.

[22] J.B. Poster, N. Dean, J. Biol. Chem. 271 (1996) 3837–3845.

[23] H. Hashimoto, A. Sakakibara, M. Yamasaki, K. Yoda, J. Biol. Chem. 272 (1997) 16308–16314.

[24] N. Dean, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92 (1995) 1287–1291.

[25] Y. Shimma, A. Nishikawa, B. bin Kassim, A. Eto, Y. Jigami, Mol. Gen. Genet. 256 (1997) 469–480.

[26] M. Lussier, A.M. Sdicu, E. Winnett, D.H. Vo, J. Sheraton, A. Dusterhoft, R.K. Storms, H. Bussey, Yeast 13 (1997) 267–274.

[27] M. Gentzsch, W. Tanner, EMBO J. 15 (1996) 5752–5759.

[28] P.A. Romero, A. Herscovics, J. Biol. Chem. 264 (1989) 1946–1950.

[29] A.J. Reason, A. Dell, P.A. Romero, A. Herscovics, Glycobiology 1 (1991) 387–391.

[30] T. Nagasu, Y. Shimma, Y. Nakanishi, J. Kuromitsu, K. Iwama, K. Nakayama, Y. Jigami, Yeast 8 (1992) 535–547.

[31] K. Nakayama, T. Nagasu, Y. Shimma, J. Kuromitsu, Y. Jigami, EMBO J. 11 (1992) 2511–2519.
[32] B. Esmon, P.C. Esmon, R. Schekman, J. Biol. Chem. 259 (1984) 10322–10327.
[33] U. Tillmann, R. Gunther, J. Schweden, E. Bause, Eur. J. Biochem. 162 (1987) 635–642.
[34] A. Camirand, A. Heysen, B. Grondin, A. Herscovics, J. Biol. Chem. 266 (1991) 15120–15127.
[35] J.C. Byrd, A.L. Tarentino, F. Maley, P.H. Atkinson, R.B. Trimble, J. Biol. Chem. 257 (1982) 14657–14666.
[36] P.A. Romero, B. Sleno, A. Herscovics, Glycobiology 4 (1994) 135.
[37] Y. Nakanishi-Shindo, K. Nakayama, A. Tanaka, Y. Toda, Y. Jigami, J. Biol. Chem. 268 (1993) 26338–26345.
[38] K. Nakayama, Y. Nakanishi-Shindo, A. Tanaka, Y. Haga-Toda, Y. Jigami, FEBS Lett. 412 (1997) 547–550.
[39] L. Lehle, A. Eiden, K. Lehnert, A. Haselbeck, E. Kopetzki, FEBS Lett. 370 (1995) 41–45.
[40] M.F. Verostek, R.B. Trimble, Glycobiology 5 (1995) 671–681.
[41] A.M. Neiman, V. Mhaiskar, V. Manus, F. Galibert, N. Dean, Genetics 145 (1997) 637–645.
[42] D.E. Levin, E. Bartlett-Huebusch, J. Cell Biol. 116 (1992) 1221–1229.
[43] G. Paravicini, M. Cooper, L. Friedli, D.J. Smith, J.L. Carpentier, L.S. Klig, M.A. Payton, Mol. Cell. Biol. 12 (1992) 4896–4905.
[44] T.J. Beeler, D. Fu, J. Rivera, E. Monaghan, K. Gable, T.N. Dunn, Mol. Gen. Genet. 255 (1997) 570–579.
[45] G. Sipos, A. Puoti, A. Conzelmann, J. Biol. Chem. 270 (1995) 19709–19715.
[46] A. Puoti, C. Desponds, A. Conzelmann, J. Cell Biol. 113 (1991) 515–525.
[47] H. Hashimoto, K. Yoda, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 241 (1997) 682–686.
[48] J. Jungmann, S. Munro, EMBO J. 17 (1998) 423–434.
[49] J.C. Paulson, K.J. Colley, J. Biol. Chem. 264 (1989) 17615–17618.
[50] P.K. Tsai, J. Frevert, C.E. Ballou, J. Biol. Chem. 259 (1984) 3805–3811.
[51] R.E. Chapman, S. Munro, EMBO J. 13 (1994) 4896–4907.
[52] P.K. Gopal, C.E. Ballou, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 84 (1987) 8824–8828.
[53] G. Mondesert, S.I. Reed, J. Cell Biol. 132 (1996) 137–151.
[54] L.M. Hernandez, L. Ballou, E. Alvarado, B.L. Gillece-Castro, A.L. Burlingame, C.E. Ballou, J. Biol. Chem. 264 (1989) 11849–11856.
[55] E. Alvarado, L. Ballou, L.M. Hernandez, C.E. Ballou, Biochemistry 29 (1990) 2471–2482.
[56] C.L. Yip, S.K. Welch, F. Klebl, T. Gilbert, P. Seidel, F.J. Grant, P.J. O'Hara, V.L. MacKay, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91 (1994) 2723–2727.
[57] M. Gentzsch, W. Tanner, Glycobiology 7 (1997) 481–486.
[58] M. Gentzsch, T. Immervoll, W. Tanner, FEBS Lett. 377 (1995) 128–130.
[59] S. Roseman, Chem. Phys. Lipids 5 (1970) 270–297.

[60] K. Lidholt, L. Kjellen, U. Lindahl, Biochem. J. 261 (1989) 999–1007.
[61] K. Lidholt, U. Lindahl, Biochem. J. 287 (1992) 21–29.
[62] T.G. Chappell, M.A.N. Hajibagheri, K. Ayscough, G. Warren, Mol. Biol. Cell 5 (1994) 519–528.
[63] T.G. Chappell, G. Warren, J. Cell Biol. 109 (1989) 2693–2702.
[64] D.J. Lew, S.I. Reed, Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 5 (1995) 17–23.
[65] D.G. Drubin, W.J. Nelson, Cell 84 (1996) 335–344.
[66] D.J. Lew, S.I. Reed, J. Cell Biol. 129 (1995) 739–749.
[67] G. Mondesert, D.J. Clark, S.I. Reed, Genetics 147 (1997) 421–434.
[68] T. Nakajima, C.E. Ballou, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 72 (1975) 3912–3916.
[69] R.E. Cohen, W. Zhang, C.E. Ballou, J. Biol. Chem. 257 (1982) 5730–5737.
[70] P.A. Romero, A. Athanasiadis, M. Lussier, A. Herscovics, Yeast 10 (1994) 1111–1115.
[71] T.R. Graham, M.F. Verostek, V. Mackay, R. Trimble, S.D. Emr, Yeast 8 (1992) 5458.
[72] R.E. Cohen, L. Ballou, C.E. Ballou, J. Biol. Chem. 255 (1980) 7700–7707.
[73] C. Devlin, C.E. Ballou, Mol. Microbiol. 4 (1990) 1993–2001.
[74] S. Nakamura, H. Takasaki, K. Kobayashi, A. Kato, J. Biol. Chem. 268 (1993) 12706–12712.
[75] R.D. Basco, M.D. Munoz, L.M. Hernandez, C.V. de Aldana, G. Larriba, Yeast 9 (1993) 221–234.
[76] C. Abeijon, P. Orlean, P.W. Robbins, C.B. Hirschberg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 86 (1989) 6935–6939.
[77] C. Abeijon, K. Yanagisawa, E.C. Mandon, A. Hausler, K. Moremen, C.B. Hirschberg, P.W. Robbins, J. Cell Biol. 122 (1993) 307–323.
[78] M. Perez, C.B. Hirschberg, Methods Enzymol. 138 (1987) 709–715.
[79] N. Dean, Y.B. Zhang, J.B. Poster, J. Biol. Chem. 272 (1997) 31908–31914.
[80] D. Ma, D.G. Russell, S.M. Beverley, S.J. Turco, J. Biol. Chem. 272 (1997) 3799–3805.
[81] C. Abeijon, P.W. Robbins, C.B. Hirschberg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93 (1996) 5963–5968.
[82] A. Descouteaux, Y. Luo, S.J. Turco, S.M. Beverley, Science 269 (1995) 1869–1872.
[83] C. Abeijon, E.C. Mandon, P.W. Robbins, C.B. Hirschberg, J. Biol. Chem. 271 (1996) 8851–8854.
[84] B.K. Benton, S.D. Plump, J. Roos, W.J. Lennarz, F.R. Cross, Curr. Genet. 29 (1996) 106–113.
[85] J.C. Igual, A.L. Johnson, L.H. Johnston, EMBO J. 15 (1996) 5001–5013.
[86] M.A. Kukuruzinska, K. Lennon, Glycobiology 4 (1994) 437–443.
[87] T. Roemer, G. Paravicini, M.A. Payton, H. Bussey, J. Cell Biol. 127 (1994) 567–579.
[88] C. Boone, S.S. Sommer, A. Hensel, H. Bussey, J. Cell Biol. 110 (1990) 833–1843.
[89] S.K. Roy, T. Yoko-o, H. Ikenaga, Y. Jigami, J. Biol. Chem. 273 (1998) 2583–2590.

[90] A. Helenius, Mol. Biol. Cell 5 (1994) 253–265.

[91] M. Lussier, A.M. White, J. Sheraton, T. di Paolo, J. Treadwell, S.B. Southard, C.I. Horenshtein, J. Chen-Weiner, A.F. Ram, J.C. Kapteyn, T.W. Roemer, D. Vo, D.C. Bondoc, J. Hall, W.W. Zhong, A.M. Sdicu, J. Davies, F.M. Klis, P.W. Robbins, H. Bussey, Genetics 147 (1997) 435–450.

[92] K. Hill, C. Boone, M. Goebl, R. Puccia, A.M. Sdicu, H. Bussey, Genetics 130 (1992) 273–283.

[93] A. Hausler, P.W. Robbins, Glycobiology 2 (1992) 77–84.

[94] P.A. Romero, M. Lussier, A.M. Sdicu, H. Bussey, A. Herscovics, Biochem. J. 321 (1997) 289–295.

[95] M. Lussier, A.M. Sdicu, F. Bussereau, M. Jacquet, H. Bussey, J. Biol. Chem. 272 (1997) 15527–15531.

[96] M. Lussier, A.M. Sdicu, A. Camirand, H. Bussey, J. Biol. Chem. 271 (1996) 11001–11008.

[97] X.H. Wang, K. Nakayama, Y. Shimma, A. Tanaka, Y. Jigami, J. Biol. Chem. 272 (1997) 18117–18124.

[98] T.S. Karpova, M.M. Lepetit, J.A. Cooper, Genetics 135 (1993) 693–709.
